Good morning, ladies and gentlemen, and welcome to Amalgamated Bank First Quarter 2020 Earnings Conference Call. [Operator Instructions] As a reminder, the conference is being recorded.
I would now like to turn the conference over to Mr. Drew LaBenne, Chief Financial Officer. Please go ahead, sir.
Thank you, operator and good morning everyone. We appreciate your participation in our first quarter 2020 earnings call. With me today is Keith Mestrich, President and Chief Executive Officer. As a reminder, a telephonic replay of this call will be available on the Investor section of our website for an extended period of time. Additionally, a slide deck to complement today's discussion is also available on the Investor section of our website. Before we begin, let me remind everyone that this call may contain certain
Litigation Reform Act of 1995.
We caution investors that a number of factors, some of which are beyond our control could cause actual results to differ from the expectations indicated or implied by any such forward-looking information or statements. Investors should refer to Slide 2 of our earnings slide deck as well as our 2019 10-K filed on March 13, 2020 and our other periodic reports that we file from time to time with the FDIC, typically under cautionary note regarding forward-looking statements and risk factors. For further description or explanation of those items that could cause actual results to differ materially from those indicated or implied by any forward-looking statements that we make. Additionally, during today's call, we will discuss certain non-GAAP measures, which we believe are useful in evaluating our performance.
The presentation of this additional information should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for results prepared in accordance with the U.S. GAAP. A reconciliation of these non-GAAP measures to the most comparable GAAP measure can be found in our earnings release as well as on our website.
At this point, I'll turn the call over to Keith.
Thank you, Drew. And good morning everyone. We appreciate your time and attention today. On today's call, I will start with an overview of our operations, given the rapid spread of COVID-19 and its impact on
New York City before reviewing our results and accomplishments in the first quarter.
I will then turn the call over to Drew to discuss our first quarter financial results in more detail. I'd like to start by thanking our employees for their extraordinary efforts during this challenging time. They have worked tirelessly to ensure that the bank's operations are run smoothly and our support to our customers and communities remains uninterrupted. The safety of our employees and customers is our top priority.
I want to share with you all a brief story of how we found ourselves in the door of the COVID crisis. I had been attending a bank conference in Switzerland in February as the pandemic was beginning to flare uncontrollably in Italy, where I was also scheduled to travel for meetings. Needless to say, I can't put my trip around and headed back to New York as my proximity to the pandemic opened my eyes to the risk that it held not only to the U.S., but New York City, in particular.
This was truly a case of being in the wrong place at the right time and I knew that our crisis management team needed to put our pandemic plan into place as I believed the shut-in of New York was imminent. Our crisis team implemented plans to move to almost 100% of our employees to a work from home environment by the middle of March and we have quickly adapted to this new normal.
Our managers are checking with their direct reports daily to ensure that our operations continue to run smoothly and I'm very pleased to report that our staff is seamlessly handling transactions and making new loans. I'm very proud of their efforts and we have not missed a beat.
Since our founding almost 100 years ago, we have had a commitment to the greater good, which has shaped the business model and our values. We believe that a financial institution mission should include using its resources, money and influence to help move its customers, its community and society forward. While we find ourselves in an unprecedented environment, our mission and values are unchanged and they continue to guide our senior leadership team and the decisions that we make as we navigate these unchartered waters.
First and foremost, we remain committed to our employees, having repositioned branch staff to other areas of the bank's operations that have seen an increase in activity. We are committed to the physical, emotional and financial health of our team and have no plans to lay off our employees during this uncertain time. We also remain committed to our community and those in need. I'm amazed and thankful for the efforts of those that are battling this crisis on the frontlines and I'm very pleased that we were able to create the Frontline Workers Fund, which offers direct assistance to nurses and healthcare workers, grocery workers, cleaning service workers, foodservice workers, laundry workers in our hospitals and retail workers, to name just a few.
We also launched the Families and Workers Fund in partnership with a consortium of foundations, whose goal is to provide financial resources to vulnerable working families across the country. This fund has initial commitment of $7.1 million and the goal is to raise $20 million in order to provide flexible funding to organizations striving to prevent workers and families from sinking deeper into levels of poverty during the initial months of this pandemic.
All of this would not be possible without the strategic transformation that Amalgamated has undergone in the last six years. When I was appointed CEO in 2014, our team undertook a broad plan designed to unlock the profit potential of the bank, which included recruiting talented executives from across the banking industry, growing our customer base, instilling a disciplined expense culture and improving the quality of both our assets and sources of funding. This has led to a stable, low-cost deposit base. We have also closed unprofitable business lines and significantly reduced our brand footprint. Most importantly, we have re-instilled a disciplined credit culture, which has resulted in strong credit performance of our loan portfolio.
As part of our comprehensive credit risk management process, we made the decision to run off our indirect C&I portfolio and significantly de-risked our balance sheet over the last two years, which I'm very grateful for given the current market backdrop. Today the bank is on firm financial footing with a strong capital base and a well underwritten loan portfolio as can be seen in our first quarter results and which provides confidence in our ability to weather the storm.
For the first quarter, we reported first, pre-tax pre-provision income of $25.5 million, which compares to $16.5 million in the 2019 fourth quarter. We grew average deposits by $400 million or 36% annualized as compared to the fourth quarter of 2019. Our cost of deposits was 33 basis points, down from 36 basis points in Q4 and non-interest bearing deposits were 48% of ending deposits.
Our net interest margin expanded three basis points to 3.46% from the 2019 fourth quarter. Importantly our efficiency ratio improved to 59.97% and we remain well capitalized with a common equity Tier 1 ratio at 12.74% as Drew will discuss in more detail. We recorded a provision expense of $8.6 million, primarily driven by $3.4 million dollars in our indirect C&I portfolio and $3 million in qualitative factors, both largely due to the impact of COVID-19.
We are watching our loan portfolio carefully and are proactively working with our borrowers in more challenging industries on payment due for us to help them through this time period. While we expect provision to go higher, we remain confident in our strong credit culture and believe we are well capitalized to handle an even more severe recession. It is important to emphasize that our core customers, our unions and non-profits are not primarily credit customers. These customers in their relationships with us are primarily on the deposit side of the bank. Additionally, though we are based and headquartered in
New York City, our credit exposure is more broad based geographically. We have also been aggressively reducing expenses to ensure we remain well positioned to handle an extended downturn, while not sacrificing the underlying fabric of our business.
Our focus has been on reducing some deposit expense, initiating a hiring freeze beginning in April, cutting back on non-essential projects, shifting resources internally, most specifically at the branch level, improving call center operations and canceling unnecessary services. We expect these steps to help mitigate the impact of lower interest in equity market values on our revenue. We have an experienced team in place that is executing the necessary adjustments on not taking out costs that will affect the operational capabilities or competitive position of our business on a go-forward basis. Looking forward, we understand that the future is uncertain, and we are opportunistically managing our noninterest expense to maintain our financial flexibility and ensure the long-term success of the bank.
One growth initiative that we have moved forward with is the opening of our commercial banking office in Boston. I'm very pleased to announce that we have hired [Mark Wash] to head the office and oversee a team. Mark has over 13 years of experience as a leader in the non-profit and political sectors in the Boston area, and brings a wealth of local knowledge to the bank Given the pandemic and shelter-in-place orders that continue to exist, we expect the ramp of our Boston office to be more gradual that we are already starting to see new client acquisition, and we will delay the opening of our Los Angeles office until the environment begins to normalize.
Turning to our capital allocation priorities, we have suspended our share buyback, given the uncertain economic environment, and we will evaluate our dividend with our Board of Directors each quarter. That said, we announced yesterday a second quarter dividend of $0.08 per share. Additionally, we are watching the economy closely and aggressively managing our business to adapt to this new environment. While M&A has been a growth driver for the bank, we will remain on the sidelines until we have more clarity on the recovery. Given our positioning and capital, we would look to take advantage of opportunities that present themselves as a recovery takes hold and the economy begins to normalize.
I'm also very proud of our mission-aligned initiatives and accomplishments that we have achieved thus far in 2020. Of note, we launched our Corporate Social Responsibility Report on April 13, which provides a comprehensive overview of our CSR policies, strategies, and initiatives. Our CSR report provides a wonderful overview of all the good that Amalgamated is doing in the world, and we continue to build on our reputation as America's socially responsible bank every day. I am also pleased to see that our initiatives and efforts are being recognized, as MSCI raised our ESG score from BBB to A, and we improved our Certified B Corporation score to 115 from 87. To conclude, I'm very pleased with our first quarter results and the positioning of our loan portfolio, as the country works together to the defeat the spread of COVID-19.
We remain well capitalized to successfully weather the storm and take advantage of opportunities that we people, clients, and customers first, and we'll work with them through this period of uncertainty. I would like to thank all of our employees again, who have worked tirelessly over the last eight weeks to make our mission possible. And together, we will see this through.
I'd now like to turn the call over to Drew for a more detailed review of our financial results.
Thank you, Keith. I will begin by reviewing our first quarter results, before turning the line back to the operator to open for questions.
Turning to Slide 7. In the fourth quarter, ending deposits increased $435.6 million or 37.5% annualized to $5.1 billion from the fourth quarter of 2019, while average deposits for the quarter were $4.8 billion. Average non-interest bearing deposits increased $276.5 million from the prior quarter, primarily due to seasonality related to the election cycle, and now represent 48% of average deposits at quarter end. Our cost of deposits decreased to 33 basis points, down three basis points compared to 36 basis points at year's end. As Keith mentioned, we expect the cost of deposits to continue decreasing as a result of re- pricing in reaction to the Fed cutting rates to near zero.
Deposits from politically active customers, such as campaigns, PACs and state and national party committees, increased $196.2 million from $578.6 million at December 31, 2019 and in the first quarter at $774.8 million as outlined on Slide 8. The election environment continues to be a source of growth for our deposit franchise. The focus for this year will be the presidential race. We have and continue to be a partner supporting the business needs of the majority of Democratic candidates.
It's worth noting that in April, we continue to see an influx of deposits and balances have increased another $247 million since the end of the first quarter, of which $47 million were from political deposits. As a result of the deposit growth, the bank just crossed the $6 billion mark in total assets.
As seen on Slide 11, we delivered loan growth of $76.2 million or 8.9% annualized as compared to December 31, 2019 and ended the quarter with $3.5 billion of total loans. This loan growth was driven primarily by an increase in C&I loans of $58 million of which $24 million was the purchase of government guaranteed loans. An increase in residential loans of $50 million and consumer loans of $26 million. The growth was offset by a $53 million decrease in commercial real estate and multifamily loans due to payoffs, where we chose not to match the terms of other lenders to retain the loans.
As a reminder, our balance of PACE assessments is now reported in the held-to-maturity securities portfolio, which is inclusive of approximately $255 million in purchase PACE assessments. Our new investment in PACE Funding Group will allow the bank to continue adding PACE assessments in the future. So the trend maybe slower than originally anticipated due to the ongoing pandemic.
As part of the Cures Act, the bank has implemented a payment deferral program for consumer and commercial customers. The standard agreement allows for three months of deferrals of principal and interest. These loans are not reported as delinquent on our financial statements and are not downgraded solely due to the payment deferral program.
In total, we have set up approximately 9% of our loans on a deferral program, which is shown on Slide 14. We expect that number to grow over the coming weeks, particularly for commercial clients who are still going through the process.
On Slide 15, we have highlighted our residential loan portfolio by origination source. All portfolios have strong loan-to-value coverage and it's worth noting this is compared to the original appraisal on the property and not adjusted for HPI increases over time. These requests in the residential portfolio were heavy in the first part of April, but has since slowed down.
Moving to Slide 16, we are showing the portfolios in C&I and CRE where we expect to see COVID-19 impacts. In the C&I portfolio, we have $112 million or 3.2% of total loans that are in industries that are deferrals. Multifamily and commercial real estate, we've had many inquiries from property owners on payment deferral options.
As of April 24, $155 million of balances have received payment deferrals. Unlike the residential portfolio, the request from commercial clients have been slower and we expect this number will continue to increase throughout the second quarter.
Our investment securities portfolio has also seen impacts on the mark to market for the available for sale securities during the first quarter. In the last few weeks of March, the fixed income markets for non- agency securities was particularly volatile and the fair value of the available for sale securities portfolio decreased by $25 million compared to year-end 2019, which was an improvement from the lows of mid- March. Since the end of Q1 values have continued to improve, but there may be more volatility in the future.
Turning to slide 18. Our net interest margin was 3.46% for the quarter, an increase of 3 basis points from the fourth quarter and a year-over-year decrease of 19 basis points. The increase in NIM compared to a linked quarter was primarily due to the lower cost of interest bearing liabilities as a cost of interest bearing deposits drop by 5 basis points and borrowing costs were essentially zero due to deposit growth.
First quarter NIM includes 4 basis points of accretion of the loan mark from the new resource bank acquisition. 6 basis points from pre-payment penalties on loans as compared to 5 and 2 basis points respectively in the fourth quarter of 2019.
On a go-forward basis, we expect NIM to decline in the second quarter as we start to see the impacts of the most recent [Fed cuts] to zero, which will be partially offset by deposit cost reductions. In addition, the inflow of deposits have been more heavily deployed in the floating rate agency securities were held in cash in the second quarter and that will also pressure net interest margin.
Net interest income for the first quarter of 2020 was $44.7 million which compares to $42.3 million in the linked quarter and an approximately $3.9 million increase as compared to $40.8 million in the same quarter of 2019.
Now on to non-interest income. Non-interest income from the first quarter of 2020 was $9.1 million increasing from $7.8 million from the fourth quarter of 2019 and a $1.7 million increase compared with the first quarter of 2019. The main factor for the growth in the quarter was the sale of our Tremont branch for a gain of $1.4 million which has been excluded from core net income.
As Keith mentioned, the initiatives to reduce non-interest expense on a go-forward basis. For the first quarter of 2020 our net interest expense decreased to $32.3 million dollars compared to $33.5 million at the end of the fourth quarter.
This quarter's expense included $1.4 million of non-core expense primarily related to branch closures, which will not recur next quarter. On a core basis, our expenses were $30.8 million, which reflects our ongoing expense discipline. As Keith mentioned earlier, we are focusing on expense management as part of our pandemic response initiatives and we expect to run expenses below $32 million per quarter for the remainder of the year.
Skipping ahead to Slide 21, the credit quality of our portfolio is held steady throughout the first quarter, as nonperforming assets totaled $65.6 million or 1.14% of period end total assets at March 31, 2020 compared to 1.25% as of December 31 2019. A decrease of $1.1 million from the linked quarter and an increase of $9.1 million as compared to March 31 2019.
Criticized and classified loans increased by approximately $16 million in the first quarter compared to the linked quarter driven primarily by the downgrade of one construction loan on the West Coast of $7.9 million and an increase in C&I and retail.
The provision for loan losses in the first quarter of 2020 totaled an expense of $8.6 million, which was primarily driven by an increase in specific reserves of $3.4 million and two loans in the indirect C&I portfolio, which were impacted by COVID-19 issues and the addition of $3 million to the qualitative reserves. The indirect C&I loans were previously TDRs and were not eligible for the payment deferral treatment afforded by the CARES Act.
We do expect to have an elevated level of provision in the second quarter as we continue to update qualitative factors is based on information available in the second quarter. Charge-offs on currently delinquent consumer loans may also be elevated in the second quarter if those loans are not deemed to be impacted by COVID-19 and are not eligible for deferral.
Skipping to Slide 21. Our GAAP and core return on tangible common equity, were 7.6% and 7.7% for the first quarter of 2020 respectively. The core return compares to 10.7% for the fourth quarter of 2019 and 10.2% for the comparable period in 2019.
The decrease in core return on tangible common equity in the linked quarter was primarily due to the previously discussed provision taken related to COVID-19. Lastly, we remain well-capitalized to support future growth.
To conclude, we are pleased with our first quarter 2020 results given all the events that have occurred. Given the fluid environment today and the uncertainty that exists, we have decided to suspend our current full year outlook until the economy begins to recover and normalize from today's events. Thank you again for your time today. We look forward to updating everyone on our second quarter results in July. With that I'd like to ask the operator to open up the line for any questions. Operator?
Thank you. At this time, we will conduct a question-and-answer session. [Operator Instructions] Our first question comes from Steven Alexopoulos with JP Morgan. Please proceed with your question.
Hey, good morning, everybody.
Hi, good morning.
Hi, Steve.
I wanted to start on the provision and regarding the commentary that you expect an increase in the Q2 reserve tied to payment deferrals. So, you guys are not on CECL, you're selling to the incurred loss model and then at that regime, what do you need to see the change further to drive an increase in the reserves. Is it just new deferrals coming in?
So Steve, the keep in mind, and this is specifically the qualitative reserve that I was talking about and we're about to talk about here just to be clear. So when, at March 31 we did not have a lot of deferral, we had actually no deferral activity that we were starting to have inquiries come in at that point and starting to get our process in the place. So when we set the qualitative factors at March 31, the only thing we really had to work off of whereas the downgrade of the economic factors, which we took from pretty much the lowest levels to the highest level. So, we did kind of the maximum qualitative impact on economic factors and we use the same standard nine factors that I think many other banks use. The factor that we will be looking at this time in Q2 is the trends of normally be the trends of past dues in the portfolio, but the trends of deferrals past dues et cetera in the portfolio, which again I think will move from pretty low levels to depending on the portfolio somewhere between, medium and high. But if we went from the event. It's not a Q1 event unfortunately.
Okay. Got you. Other banks are saying that they're seeing material drop off in new deferrals, though. I mean in terms of the pace, have you seen any abatement in terms of the pace of request? Are those still increasing?
No, as I was just saying on the call, residential has basically slowed. Actually the last few days, we've had no deferral request at all come through or new deferral requests. So that part of the portfolio has pretty much stopped. Now, we're coming up to a new set of payments, so I don't know what that's going to mean. I don't think anyone knows what that's going to mean for the next round. It might mean absolutely nothing, it might mean that we see some incremental deferrals come in, but I think the majority of it has probably already happened. On the multifamily commercial real estate, I think general commercial real estate and C&I has reacted pretty quickly. I think multifamily, a lot of April payments were made. I think they're probably waiting the landlords and is probably waiting to see the May payments and we may see some more deferrals come in through that. Now it would not surprise us at all. See more deferrals come in particularly in multifamily.
The other thing I'll add is the processing on the commercial side, at least for us is slower because on the consumer side, the residential side, we ask the customer to describe their hardship, but we don't require any proof because to do so, would be difficult and unreliable. On the commercial side, we actually asked the borrowers to document for us their decrease in cash flows before we grant the deferral. So, the process takes a little longer to work through.
Okay, that's helpful. And then on Slide 16, the COVID-19 exposed sectors, I'm curious, what worries you most in terms of what you're calling out and maybe in the CRE book, how much of that is retail?
Well, overall what worries me is probably more of a -- there's a lot to worry about, Steve, so let me just pick the one that probably worries me -- and I know, Keith, the most, because we talked about it -- is our portfolios that are based on real estate whether its residential or multifamily commercial I think have very strong loan to values and implicit in that underwriting is that we will be able to control the property over time if needed to work out the credit. And I think given how widespread the impact of this pandemic has been, it's quite possible that the rules change in terms of foreclosure, how fast properties or tenants turnover and that could mean that the normal time to work out a credit across the industry changes. I'm not saying it will, but that is I think what kind of worries me maybe more than I would know normally be worried about it, if that makes sense.
Yes. I totally agree with Drew on that. Look, what's in hotels and restaurants obviously, every bank that has those on their portfolio is going to be concerned about those individual names. It's not a huge percentage of the portfolio, so, while I don't love it, it's not the big worry. I think Drew is exactly right. What we can't predict, particularly with the New York City-centric multifamily portfolio and other things, is when the pressure will really come on landlords. What will the impact of stimulus payments and potentially new stimulus payments individuals, people starting to receive, enhanced unemployment benefits, are they able to continue to make their rent and mortgage payments? And what will be the other countervailing political pressure that will be on the ability for anybody to be able to sort of deal with the property that they have and work it out in a normal way? It is a big, big unknowing to us and well, I think we built a this and the unknowing as you look at months out into the future here were there to be extended double- digit unemployment kind of pressures is just the biggest worry that we have on that bank.
Yes. Okay, thank you. And then just finally, Drew, with deposit growth running so strong, it sounds like the pace demand has slowed a bit given the pandemic, maybe long growth, too. How do you see and what do you see for investing this camp? What kind of yield should we expect? Thanks.
Yes. It has all happened very quickly and clearly we haven't been able to thoughtfully and carefully deploy it out so in the near term, we've purchased a lot of floating rate agency securities. We do have a very strong residential pipeline from Q1 that we're working through. I think for Q2 -- and I think pace assessments that come on the books on Q2 as well will be pretty strong. So I think Q2, I think we're okay, but we're going to end up with a lot of cash and a lot of floating rate agencies on the books. Now, keep in mind, we're also expecting to have the political deposits start to run off, maybe a little bit. I don't know if at the end of Q2 we'll see that, but I think we're going to want to stay more liquid in the near term just to be in a great position to be able to offset that upcoming run off and not necessarily have to go into borrowings although we may choose to do that and we'll just continue to grow the balance sheet. But our first and foremost thought here, and I think probably most banks are in the same boat is, be extremely careful with deploying cash and capital into credit right now and make sure we understand what we're getting into as best as we can in the new environment that we're all dealing with.
Okay, great, thanks for all the color.
Thanks, Steve.
Good morning.
Hi, Chris.
Good morning, Chris.
Our next question comes from Chris O'Connell with KBW. Please proceed with your question.
I was hoping you guys could dive into a little bit the PPP program you have going on and just how it is logistically working in terms of providing your customers with the referral.
Yes. I'm happy to, Chris. We are not an SBA Certified lender and as you know, we are not a bank that's particularly geared up to do small business loans. It has never been one of our focus. We don't really have the capacity to be able to handle the origination request and the loan servicing request to handle a small business portfolio. And over the past several years, we've had a renewal relationship with one of the country's largest non-bank SBA lenders that has worked very well for us in normal times. And we made a decision early on -- probably not anticipating unlike a lot of banks quite what the demand would look like to do referrals for mostly small nonprofit organizations who are eligible for the PPP loan. They're not normally eligible for SBA loans, but were for the PPP program. We got about 850 referrals into that program. We referred them onto our partner to be able to handle those loans. Our bankers have helped people through the process and continue to fill out their applications, but our partner has really handled the underwriting and the origination of those of those loan requests
Got it. And do you know what the dollar amount is on the amount that you prefer?
I do. But, Chris, I'm going to have to get you that more accurately because I don't have that at my fingertips. Drew, do you know at the top of your head?
How many have funded?
What the total loan request volume was.
We'll get to the number, Chris.
In units? It was over 800. I think in dollar amounts it was probably -- yes, I don't know the number, actually. I don't want to speculate.
The other place where we are going to participate in PPP, which is really the only way that we have the ability to do so is from a new tech, we will or we do plan to purchase some of their sales of the PPP loans, which it actually the duration of those loans matches very well with the political run off cycle that we're anticipating. So that's a risk free short-term use of cash that we should be able to do, too, is kind of our way of helping the PPP program work.
Got it. Got it. And then, if we could shift to the balance sheet in particular loans. I think you mentioned in the press release that there is some [loan] purchases this quarter, if you could just go through maybe the amount and what type of loans those were? And then just overall your outlook on loan growth for the rest of the year given just the big shift in the environment from last quarter to now.
Yes. So in terms of loan purchases, first of all we did purchase $35 million of residential loans on the West
Coast, which normally we haven't been doing but we're doing that for CRA purposes. So those are going to be high quality residential loans. It's more about the geography that they're in than anything else. We did do some more solar loan purchases. I think the amount there is probably about $35 million. There was one transaction we had been working on for a while that did finally close. I think for residential solar purchases at least for now, that's probably it for us in terms of what we'll be doing same for residential loan purchases. And then SBA as well we, every quarter we seem to be purchasing some SBA or maybe more -- I should say SBA and USDA. They're government guaranteed loans that show up in our C&I portfolio. So we did do some more purchases for those as well. Our total government guaranteed loans sitting in C&I is now about $150 million. So it's a place we'd like to deploy capital risk free.
Got it.
Chris, just to follow up on your past question. I emailed really quickly -- our Head of Commercial Banking. The total loan request were approximately $65 million under the PPP program.
Great. And then, just finishing up on the loan side, maybe dive into the outlook for the rest of the year, just given some of the changes in the economy.
Yes, outlook's cloudy. I'll be honest. I mean what we are seeing is -- I think there are more opportunities now in high-quality loans than there were before this began. I think the multifamily space has loosened up a little bit. But obviously, we're being very cautious there, only doing the highest quality deals. We're requiring six months of P&I reserve for anything that we're currently underwriting. But those deals are now moving forward. Residential, we had so much come through in Q1 before all this happened, as a result of just rates continuing to go lower, that we actually sort of effectively turned off our pipeline. I think we're now looking at turning it on again in a very conservative manner. So I think that we should still see some growth there, but it's probably slower than we anticipated. And PACE will continue to come on as well in the securities portfolio. I'm actually pleasantly surprised with how PACE originations are going with our partners. It's certainly down, but it's not out. So, I think those will be some of our growth areas. And then we continue to have a pipeline of C&I loans as well that we're looking at. But we've obviously turned the dial several matches in terms of the risk that we're willing to put on the balance sheet at this point. But we're also still in business to originate.
Got it. And then on the deposit side, I mean, obviously political deposits were really strong this quarter and much stronger than I think even you guys were expecting. Do you have any outlook on kind of -- I mean, it's been strong coming into the second quarter as well, it seems like. I mean, is there any outlook I guess that you can provide? Or is it still kind of murky, given the election cycle?
Look, one thing I would emphasize is we've seen, as we have in the past couple of quarters, nice deposit growth across our sectors, not just in the political sector, in our commercial bankers. Even though they're in a working home environment, they remain active in terms of talking to a number of our existing customers and looking for new relationships. So that activity has not stopped or slowed at all. The election cycle obviously is also in a bit of a murky environment. It's gotten a little bit more clarity on the that piece of the race, will start to see a consolidation of contributions there that will help in that. And we should continue to see some growth there.
Vulnerable Democratic candidates who are in their first term had a very, very good first quarter of fundraising. Anticipate them having a good second quarter as well. But we should, as in past years, start to see a plateau start to happen where people, as we've talked about before, sort of raise and spend that an equal clip. And I think as campaigns make adjustments to figure out how to spend money in this environment, we should start to enter into a plateau phase and then again see the run-off of the deposit portfolio towards the end of the third quarter, beginning of the fourth quarter, as we've seen in past election cycles. That's the best crystal ball I have at this point. I could be wrong by a little bit, but I think that would be the general pattern that we'll see, Chris.
Great. Thank you. And then, just one last one on the NIM. I appreciate the guidance. Probably down next quarter, and I know there's a lot of moving parts here, particularly with the political deposits and kind of unknown -- how that might end up for the quarter. But assuming maybe they stay flat here for the remainder of 2Q at the balances payout that you guys gave in the deck, just given all the movement in short-term rates, can you give any look into just maybe a range or how that might factor into the quarter- over-quarter and NIM for 2Q?
It's going to be -- it's tough to see where it is this early in the quarter, given all the movements that have happened. I mean I think you're probably going to be looking at just -- and it's a combination of a little bit of NII starting to flatten or maybe drop a little bit, and then the balance sheet growth just expanding very rapidly because keep in mind the averages that you're looking at for the Q1 NIM are probably -- just given all the end of quarter activity, are probably $200 million light compared to where they would be if you just take the April or the kind of end of March average, if that makes sense. But it's going to be on lower yielding assets because of where we've deployed it.
I think maybe in terms of NII, which I'm a little more comfortable talking about at this point, just given all the volatility, when we model -- we obviously had our disclosure last quarter where it was I think about $13 million, down for 100 basis point drop, which just happened. I think we're looking at more like $7 million down when we factor everything in, which is a pretty decent sized improvement, and that's a combination of I think a little better performance in terms of prepayment speeds, LIBOR. That assumes LIBOR comes down a little bit from where it was, which it's already doing. And I think our deposit re- pricing has been more effective than we thought it would be in the model. And part of that is just how fast it happened and money market yields, which are sometimes competition for us effectively going to zero. So, I'm very pleased at least with our outlook, which is always subject to some error in terms of where NII is going to go versus what we had originally projected with the down scenario.
Got it. And that $7 million that's coming off the $44.7 million number this quarter?
No, no, no. Annually.
Got it. Just wanted to confirm that.
Great. All right, that's all I had. Thank you.
Yes, it's a good one to confirm, Chris. Call it $1 million to $2 million a quarter.
[Operator Instructions] There are no further questions in queue. I would like to turn the call back over to management for closing comments.
Thank you, operator. I just want to thank everyone who joined our call today. We hope that you and your families continue to stay safe and calm. We're certainly living through a challenging time, and I wanted to leave you with just a few concluding thoughts. First, I continue to be very proud every day of our employees who've worked so hard to support our customers since we moved to a remote working environment. Secondly, our commitment to our employees, customers, and communities remains true to our mission and values. Third, we have many levers for growth, including our sustainable lending, geographic expansion, and new product development in our trust business, to name just a few. Fourth, we also have the ability to drive additional operational efficiencies, and are reviewing opportunities to further reduce our expenses without impacting our competitive positioning. And taken together, and despite the challenging backdrop, we're optimistic that we can continue to grow the bank, and are confident in our financial positioning, such that we will be able to take advantage of market dislocations, as the economy begins to normalize again.
And as a reminder, we anticipate filing our 10-Q this evening. So, thank you again for your time today. And everyone, we will see you soon. Thanks.
This does conclude today's teleconference. You may disconnect your lines at this time, and have a great day.
Good morning, and welcome to the AngioDynamics Fiscal Year 2020 Third Quarter Earnings Call. [Operator Instructions] As a reminder, this conference is being recorded.
The news release detailing the fiscal 2020 third quarter results crossed the wire earlier this morning and is available on the company's website. This conference call is also being broadcast live over the Internet at the Investors section of the company's website at www.angiodynamics.com. And the webcast replay of the call will be available at the same site approximately 1 hour after the end of today's call.
Before we begin, I would like to caution listeners that during the course of this conference call, the company will make projections or forward-looking statements regarding future events, including statements about expected revenue, adjusted earnings and gross margins for fiscal year 2020. Management encourages you to review the company's past and future filings with the SEC, including, without limitation, to the company's most recent annual report on Form 10-K as well as most recent Form 10-Q for the quarter ending February 29, 2020, which identify specific factors that may cause the actual results or events to differ materially from those described in the forward-looking statements.
A slide package offering insight into the company's financial results is also available on the Investors section of the company's website under Events and Presentations. This presentation should be read in conjunction with the press release discussing the company's operating results and financial performance during this morning's conference call.
I'd now like to turn the call over to Jim Clemmer, AngioDynamics' President and Chief Executive Officer. Mr. Clemmer?
Thank you, Melissa, and good morning, everyone, and thank you for joining us for AngioDynamics' fiscal 2020 third quarter earnings call.
Joining me on today's call is Steve Trowbridge, AngioDynamics' Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer, who will provide a detailed analysis of our third quarter financial performance.
Given the impact that the COVID-19 pandemic is having on our company and our customers, during this call, Steve and I will take a tailored approach to assessing our third quarter results and discussing our perspectives on the business moving forward. With respect to the third quarter, we will discuss our forward, we will discuss our perspectives looking through the lens of the facts as they exist today, while acknowledging that the facts, circumstances and situations for everyone remain highly fluid and dynamic and are likely to change significantly in the short and medium term.
With that said, I'd now like to provide an overview of our operating and execution highlights for the quarter as well as some commentary on the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our company.
We had a strong third quarter. We reported solid top line performance during the quarter. Our revenue increased 6.5% year-over-year and increased 9.3% when excluding Asclera, and it was driven by growth in all 3 of our businesses. In addition, we are pleased to report that we delivered adjusted EPS of $0.01 per share. We believe this clearly demonstrates our ability to simultaneously invest in those businesses that will fuel our transformation into a growth company while being thoughtful and disciplined about our overall spending. We believe these results provide continued evidence of our successful ongoing transformation into a more focused medical technology company delivering unique and innovative health care solutions into larger and faster growth markets.
During the quarter, we remained focused on 3 drivers to continue this transformation: Internal research and development, M&A and clinical and regulatory pathway expansion. Let me update you on our accomplishments in each of these areas.
On the R&D front, we continue to focus investments on our 3 key technologies: AngioVac, AURYON and NanoKnife, while seeking out ways to increase the profitability profile of our other products. Earlier this year, we announced that we had launched NanoKnife 3.0 and AngioVac 3.0. And we spoke with you about expanding our AngioVac platform through the continued commitment to focused internal research and development. I'm happy to say that we remain on track to deliver 2 new AngioVac products in the next 12 to 18 months, and we look forward to sharing these developments with you in the future.
In terms of our recent M&A activities, we continue to advance the AURYON technology and progress towards commercial launch through investment in 3 primary areas: ensuring a strong and robust supply chain, building position and sales training programs and building a dedicated selling and marketing channel to take this product to the market in the proper way.
Additionally, the integration of our recently acquired C3 Wave PICC tip location system is progressing nicely and customers have already begun to express interest in this new product. M&A will continue over the medium and long term to play an important role in our transformation. However, we are clearly in uncharted territory due to the COVID-19 global pandemic. While we will maintain our disciplined approach of identifying appropriate M&A targets and will continue to assess opportunities, we will also prioritize the strength of our balance sheet amid this rapidly evolving macroeconomic climate. Steve will provide more details and perspectives on our liquidity position later in the call. Given that backdrop, I am comfortable saying that we will be more conservative with respect to M&A opportunities in the current environment of heightened uncertainty.
The third quarter -- the third driver of our transformation is clinical and regulatory expansion and data generation, which are foundational pillars to our strategic transformation. I'd like to update you on our 2 most important efforts underway, PATHFINDER and DIRECT. While we continue to focus on these areas, the current environment obviously requires flexibility. With CMS and hospitals throughout the country seeking to prioritize critical care procedures and seeking to preserve treatment capacity, additional site initiation activities and patient enrollment efforts in both PATHFINDER and DIRECT have been paused. We are working internally to be in a position to ramp up these efforts as quickly as possible once the situation allows us to do so.
In mid-January, we launched the PATHFINDER I-Registry, a pilot study to evaluate the safety and efficacy of our AURYON Atherectomy System. We believe this study will provide valuable, scientifically backed data to further differentiate the AURYON System from competitive products in this space and build upon the excellent long-term results that patients experienced during the IDE.
The NanoKnife DIRECT IDE saw solid progress through the third quarter. As of today, 19 study sites have secured IRB approval. We remain very pleased with the pace at which leading institutions have committed to our comprehensive clinical study and securing IRB approval.
Before I turn the call over to Steve, I'd like to provide an update on how the COVID-19 pandemic is currently impacting our business. Our office-based employees are working remotely and doing so efficiently and effectively. From a manufacturing standpoint, we have employees on the manufacturing floor to ensure that our products are available to help save lives. Given the nature of this pandemic, while we've effectively implemented the business continuity and contingency plans that we've had in place, we've also had to create some new ones to help to protect our employees while they protect our supply chain and ensure that production of our critical care products continues uninterrupted.
In the interest of their safety, at the request of our customers, we have grounded all of our field-based sales reps in order to help reduce transmission of the virus and free up hospital resources to focus on caring for patients with COVID-19. Despite these challenges, I'm very proud of our team. They've done a terrific job in adjusting and providing remote support to our global customers.
We have been very proactive around CRM activities and business development planning, so that we are prepared to spring into action once our customers are ready and have elective procedures resume. We have had great momentum heading into this, and we want to be sure we're ready to continue to build upon that momentum as we exit whenever that may be.
From a procedural impact perspective, our business includes products that fall on both sides of the critical care and necessary line. AngioVac cases saw strong growth during the third quarter and into the early days of the fourth quarter, driven by AngioVac 3.0. But over the past few weeks, we have seen procedures slow as hospitals have rightfully shifted their focus to preparing for COVID-19 patients. We have seen some slowing of EVLT procedures and even some labs closing their doors in the past couple of weeks. We anticipate that this business will be softer in the fourth quarter.
Oncology procedures are straddling the line between acute and elective-like. We expect this trend to continue, with some cases proceeding as planned and others seeing delays. We do believe that these are delays, not cancellations, as these are treatments that the majority of patients will proceed with.
Laser atherectomy procedures with our AURYON laser have been continuing in patches, consistent with other procedures and are still in the very early ramp-up stage.
And lastly, sales of our VA products, including PICCs, midlines and ports, remain strong even over the past few weeks, driven by our new agreement with Premier and a couple of new line extensions for our PICCs. While the current environment is certainly unprecedented, we are taking the necessary steps to prioritize the health and safety of our employees while also ensuring that we are positioning ourselves for continued innovation in both as the environment returns to normal over time.
With that, I'd like to turn the call over to Steve Trowbridge, our Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer.
Thanks, Jim, and good morning, everyone. Before I begin, I'd like to point you to the presentation on our Investor Relations website summarizing the key items associated with our quarterly and year-to- date results. I'd like to reiterate something that Jim mentioned earlier, which is that with respect to the third quarter, we will discuss our results looking through the lens of the facts as they existed at that time. With respect to our business moving forward, we will discuss our perspectives looking through the lens of the facts as they exist today. Additionally, unless otherwise noted, all prior year results and comparisons exclude the contribution of our NAMIC fluid management business, which we divested at the end of our fiscal year ended May 31, 2019.
Our net sales for the third quarter of fiscal 2020 increased 6.5% year-over-year to $69.8 million.
Excluding the fiscal 2019 revenue contribution from the Asclera sclerotherapy product, which we stopped distributing during the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2019, revenue for the third quarter was 9.3%. As Jim mentioned earlier, all 3 of our businesses posted solid growth during the quarter, led by strong performances by AngioVac and NanoKnife as well as our core PICCs and ports products.
Our total VIT business grew 4.3% year-over-year and when excluding Asclera, grew 10.5%, driven by higher sales of AngioVac, which were up 44% year-over-year, and a second straight quarter of growth of our core products. AngioVac procedural volume remains strong with procedures increasing 33% year-over- year, representing our tenth consecutive quarter of double-digit volume and revenue growth.
Vascular Access revenue increased 10.3% during the quarter, driven by double-digit growth in sales of PICCs, ports and midlines.
We continue to integrate our recently acquired C3 Wave tip location system and are already seeing positive impact of this product on our PICC business, together with the value PICC distribution relationship we entered to in the third quarter.
Revenue from our oncology business increased 5.1%, primarily related to growth from NanoKnife, which was driven by both strong capital and disposable sales. Total NanoKnife sales grew 47% year-over-year, including growth in disposable sales of 21%. Total NanoKnife capital sales were $1.4 million in the quarter. This growth was somewhat offset by a continued anticipated decline in sales of our radiofrequency ablation product as well as softness in the performance of our BioSentry and balloon businesses.
Moving down the income statement. Our gross margin for the third quarter of fiscal 2020 was 57.8%, a decrease of 40 basis points compared to a year ago, driven primarily by product mix. As we discussed during our call last quarter, this decrease was in line with our expectations. Our research and development expenses during the third quarter of fiscal 2020 were $8.4 million or 12% of sales compared to $6.9 million or 10.6% of sales a year ago. We are continuing to invest strategically in R&D and clinical with a focus on further developing our NanoKnife, AngioVac and AURYON products, while focusing on driving profitability of our other businesses. And prior to the current environment, we continued to expect R&D spend to be between $32 million and $34 million in fiscal year 2020, including investments related to our acquisition of Eximo Medical, now AURYON.
In the current environment, we're looking to maintain investment in our 3 key technologies while being more measured in our investments in other areas. SG&A expense for the third quarter of fiscal 2020 increased to $31.1 million, representing 44.6% of sales compared to $27.1 million, representing 41.4% of sales a year ago.
Prior to the current environment, we continued to anticipate SG&A spend between $126 million and $130 million for fiscal year 2020. We will support our upcoming product launches as well as the needed investments for a commercial release of AURYON heading into fiscal '21. Given the current environment, we are continually assessing controllable discretionary spend with an eye towards spend and cash management while maintaining investment in our key technologies.
Our adjusted net income for the third quarter of fiscal 2020 was $0.4 million or $0.01 per share compared to adjusted net income of $1.9 million or $0.05 per share in the third quarter of last year. Adjusted EBITDA in the third quarter of fiscal 2020 was $3.8 million compared to $7.7 million in the third quarter of fiscal 2019.
Turning to our balance sheet. In the third quarter of fiscal 2020, we began with roughly $41.2 million in cash, and we used $17.8 million of cash in operating activities. During the third quarter, we used $10 million of cash to fund the acquisition of the C3 Wave PICC tip location system. As of February 29, 2020, we had $27.2 million in cash and cash equivalents and $15 million in debt outstanding.
We entered this current environment with a strong foundational position, having a net cash position and a revolver with meaningful available capacity. In addition, inventory levels were elevated in anticipation of completing our move out of the Glens Falls facility that we sold to Medline at the end of fiscal '19. In business continuity plans. We've been in contact with our strong and long-standing banking group and are keeping a close eye on the environment. We're taking a thoughtful and disciplined approach to our balance sheet. We're focusing on our collections. And while we will continue to keep a close eye on them, we are pleased to say that commerce continues to be moving. We are also paying close attention to our payables. We're not taking a cynical approach, and we have positioned ourselves to be a good customer while also being proactive. Overall, we believe we're in a solid position, and we'll remain focused on maintaining dry powder and being proactive in the current environment.
Consistent with this approach, we have initiated a modest draw of $25 million on our revolver. We believe that this is a prudent move, illustrating both our focus on cash and liquidity and our strong foundational position.
Turning now to guidance. As Jim and I have discussed on this call, we're pleased with our third quarter results. In addition, we were encouraged by our sales in the month of March, both on their own merits and in light of the current environment. However, we have seen a slowdown and a shift in procedures during the last couple of weeks. Given the reigning uncertainty, we don't believe it is possible to provide substantiated fourth quarter or full year guidance at this time. As a result and as noted in our press release issued this morning, we are officially withdrawing our full year guidance. However, I will discuss some directional color to help provide insight into what we are seeing in the market.
As we've discussed throughout this call, the COVID-19 situation is incredibly dynamic, which mandates and recommends changing on a daily basis on both a national and state-by-state level with no firm insight -- no firm end in sight, excuse me. The primary unknowns at this point are twofold: The first is the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and the impact it will have on elective procedures. The second is that we are unsure when our reps will be allowed to get back on the road and gain access to our hospitals and physicians' offices. The potential range of outcomes given these unknowns is so broad and far-reaching that we are unable to provide an accurate guidance range at this time.
As we mentioned earlier, we had a strong third quarter and saw that strength continue through the majority of the month of March. We're encouraged by this, but we saw decline in procedural volumes in late March and into the first week of April, which we anticipate will continue throughout the fourth quarter. While this is incrementally more granularity on the current quarter than we would normally provide, we felt it was important to share this given the context. As Jim mentioned earlier, we established exciting momentum through the end of Q3, and we're working hard to ensure that we will be well positioned to sustain and build on that momentum once the situation allows. With that, I'd like to turn the call back to the operator to open the call for questions.
[Operator Instructions] Our first question comes from the line of Jayson Bedford with Raymond James.
So just a few questions. I was surprised with the strength in the Vascular Access business. Can you just give us a little more detail on kind of the drivers of the strength? And if you could, maybe quantify the impact from the Premier agreement on the Port business. And also, you mentioned some sort of value PICC distribution agreement in the quarter, and I was a little unclear as to what that was. So a little detail on that would be helpful.
A couple of things. So in our VA business, as we mentioned in the fall, the Port win on the Premier business was important for us. But it wasn't the only piece of strength we saw during the quarter. Because really, this quarter was more getting those customers that are part of the 2 Premier compliant agreements to get signed on with us and start the conversion processes. So there was some growth there, but not a whole lot. Good news was the growth was balanced.
So our base PICC business, both our BioFlo and non-BioFlo, also experienced a strong quarter. And a lot of that, Jason, too, we haven't talked a lot about it, but we have a couple of really good partners in the mobile PICC business. And these partners are committed to our BioFlo PICCs. And some of these partners have been gaining market share over the past year or so, building up their markets as they provide that valuable service to many hospitals looking to outsource that technique and that procedure to these mobile PICC teams. So again, they choose BioFlo in most of those cases.
And finally, we did add some new products. We've talked a little bit about it, just around our PICC portfolio. As you know, with BioFlo, we have a high-end PICC with unique capabilities, but we had some gaps in our PICC line. So we just filled in a couple of the gaps with some other products.
Jason, we expect the VA business to grow with the areas that we guided last year. As you know, 2019 was the first year of growth in many. And I think we anticipated growth about that same level this year. And going forward, it will be a business that's very well run, and the portfolio is a bit more balanced. And now we made the acquisition of the C3 Wave tip location system. Again, takes out one more barrier that we've had there.
Jason, we did see strength throughout the VA portfolio throughout the third quarter. It was pretty balanced, as Jim mentioned, with our PICCs, ports, midlines and dialysis businesses all growing. So we hit a little bit on the value PICC that Jim talked about, filling in the gaps in those lines. We have mentioned C3 in the prepared remarks. As we talked about before, we don't really expect to see a big inflection potential from C3 until we get to the point where we're adding navigation to that technology. So we've seen strength in the base PICCs business moving in throughout this third quarter, and we see that strength continuing as we head into the fourth quarter. So one of the things that Jim talked about in his remarks was that line that we're drawing between products that fall on the elective-like or those that can be delayed, and those that are clearly acute and critical care. We've been seeing the VA business in those PICCs, midlines clearly falling on that line of critical care, and we expect to see that strength continue throughout our fourth quarter.
Okay. So I guess just to summarize that point, Steve, the growth that you saw this quarter seems pretty durable, at least, for the next few quarters?
We believe so, yes.
Okay. And then I'll just ask one more, and then I'll get back in queue. Can you just update us on the status of the AURYON launch here? I'm just a little unclear as to the rep build-out. Is that complete? Given the dynamic with COVID, when do you expect a full commercial launch?
So -- Jason, good point. It's been 6 months now that we've owned the Eximo business and the AURYON product. So as we talked to you before, the first 3 parts of the move were, a, supply chain build-out. So now we're manufacturing the laser hardware to our specs and our supply chain. We're also manufacturing now the disposable catheters to our specs and our supply chain. So our supply chain team has done a great job with our quality partners the last 6 months building this out.
Number two, we needed to build a sales training program and a physician training program. We've done those as well. So ready, prepared to communicate those to the field.
And finally, number three was the dedicated commercial team as we communicated we'd build. So today, we have 15 people dedicated to this AURYON business. And over 10 of those people are dedicated field sales reps. Each of those have been hired. They have experience in their past life working for probably one of the other companies in this space. So these folks are already experienced atherectomy salespeople. They have relationships in their field in the areas that we've hired them in, and we expect good performance from them.
As we get closer to full launch, though, Jason, then we'll give you a little more time line as to when we'll add more people. So we're not at a full launch yet. We're right on track where we'd be with this process. So we're excited on what we've learned. As soon as we get through a little bit of this COVID-19 situation, we can take a deep breath, and we'll share with you little more details around the next phase of the launch. But it includes having podium presence, speakers to talk about the product, how it works and how it's being received in the market.
Is COVID the gating factor here? Meaning, once COVID is, I don't want to say over, but once this -- everything relaxes, will you be able to launch the product?
We will. Jason, I don't think -- COVID hasn't changed our plans. I think we told you guys when we bought it, we need about a 6-month window before we start to launch. In the last couple of weeks, we've slowed down spending here in a responsible fashion and slowed down some of the investments we are making, just to make sure we're disciplined with our cash management and our balance sheet. But COVID is not going to be part of the AURYON story. Really, we're building a story around those 3 areas. I can't wait till we can share more with you. It's really going at the pace we expected, and we're excited to keep building the team there.
Jason, we continue to invest in AURYON. And so as we talked about our cash management priorities, we want to make sure that we're ready to hit the ground running when market dynamics allow us to do that. So we've continued to, as Jim mentioned, build up our supply chain, bring in the salespeople, be ready to go. We do see the atherectomy procedures as some that are on that line tending to be delayed during the current environment, while health care systems are looking to build up capacity. So once that does ease a bit, given the investments we're making, we'll be ready to hit the ground running, as Jim said, according to our original plans.
Our next question comes from the line of Jason Mills with Canaccord Genuity.
First, maybe a 20,000-foot view question. The thing that struck us is quite surprising as we, like everybody else, are trying to read as much as we can about what's going on in the current environment in health care and procedural volume, specifically, is the extent to which procedures you wouldn't assume would abate vis--vis a crisis like COVID, physicians aren't seeing it. So STEMIs, you're even seeing fewer strokes, acute ischemic strokes come in to the hospitals. And you mentioned pulmonary embolism. You said you've heard from physicians that suggest that they're seeing fewer cases. Those tend to be acute cases, those tend to be cases you can't delay, they're life-saving cases. Have you seen this as well? And what factors do you attribute to this? I think physicians are scratching their heads. And I just love your commentary on that as well as, perhaps, could you speak regionally? Let us know, are there any parts of the country or the world where you aren't seeing this phenomenon play out, where you are seeing sort of a normalized trend, if you will, of these cases that you guys participate in that are acute, like pulmonary embolism, come into the hospital. And then I have a follow-up.
Jason, this is Jim. So Jason, good question. I had a conversation 3 days ago, I think it was, with a Chief of Surgery at one of the large Boston hospitals who had mentioned, for the past 3 or so weeks, they spent so much time gearing up to be ready to care for the COVID-19 patients that they've asked some of the other doctors to stand down, not just because they need to free up ICU space, but they want to free up PPE equipment to that level for the caregivers that are caring for people in the critical care environment. So we've talked to many of our physician partners. And as we mentioned to you, you saw in Q3, really dynamic growth with the AngioVac product and really well received. But even here now, we've seen some cases slow down a bit. I think physicians are being told to stay home, stand down in many cases. Now we say that to you, knowing the severe acuity that many of the patients that our products treat have. The 1 cancers and ask them to go home, and we'll call you back with the treatment plan soon." In the past, they would have had an initial treatment plan, we may have been part of those treatment plans.
So Jason, I think we, like you're looking for, are looking for that clarity from our customers. We're speaking to a lot of our customers. Because we're trying to gain that clarity and be ready to support them. Because we're also expecting their expectations of our support may be different coming out of this. We want to make sure we can align what their expectations are with our resources.
You also asked about kind of geographic or regionally, Jason. In the U.S., we've seen the pockets that I think we've all seen as a collective body around the hotspots. Some are more severe than others. But really, I guess, even -- when I talk about U.S. only, kind of all of our doctors and physician partners are telling us the same thing. They've been asked to step aside a little bit and to hold off treatments when they can, not all cases, you can, as we know, depending on the patient acuity. But I think we're going to see at some point, I think some hospitals that we're speaking with are also planning now to get back into a treatment protocol and to catch up for some of these treatments that have been delayed. So I would expect, at one point, we're going to see not just a normalized treatment plan again, but even a little catch up period, I believe, from our conversations with customers to make sure they can treat the people who've had to stand down for a little bit longer.
And Jason, outside of the U.S., as you know, 80% of our revenue is U.S.-based, but our global partners are telling us similar stories. We've even seen a couple maybe situations where, in Europe, a couple of treatments have come back maybe a little sooner in the last week or 2, so people being treated with our oncology products.
Jason, this is Steve. You had mentioned pulmonary embolism. Our current AngioVac product is not really a pulmonary embolism product. For the most part, our current AngioVac is used with tumbling right atrial masses and tricuspid valve vegetation. What we -- the product -- the markets that we play in, I think, are good examples of what we're seeing in this dynamic environment. Early on in this process, early in March, our AngioVac sales volume and the procedure volume that we were supporting with our clinical specialists remained quite strong. And so we were initially looking at those right heart and tricuspid valve vegetation cases as being on that necessary acute side of the line that we talked about. A trend that we clearly have seen over the last couple of weeks is that line has moved or the physicians have defined where that line is, and that continues to change. And we have seen a drop-off in those procedures.
Oncology procedures are another example of ones that we're seeing change throughout this time, based mostly on what Jim talked about, which is physicians looking to build up their capacity. But when you think about the oncology cases and when you think about those cases that the current AngioVac product plays in, we do see those as delays and not lost procedures that are coming back. Now as we mentioned in the past, and Jim talked about the 2 AngioVac product extensions that we expect to see in the next 12 to 18 months, those are the products that we expect to be able to allow us entrance into the pulmonary embolism space and to get into that middle section of the thrombus management space, where we think that there's a lot of cases to be done.
That's helpful, both of you. And I wanted to get into a little bit more detail, if you're willing, on the new AngioVac products or at least targeting. And you sort of answered that to some extent but -- with pulmonary embolism. Maybe talk about the targets for those 2 products? Are they products that target 2 separate anatomies, i.e., pulmonary embolism for one, deep vein thrombosis, generally speaking, on the venous side on the other? Or what detail can you give?
And I guess, lastly, and I'll get back in queue, just back to the sort of macro discussion here because I'm interested in the macro before we tackle the micro. I mean, society has to tackle the macro. And the other need [indiscernible] as we can get on the frontlines for COVID, you're seeing hospitals furlough health care workers, techs, et cetera, that would otherwise be participating in these elective procedures that, as you mentioned, are not happening as ubiquitously nearly as they were before. Is that -- when we're on the other side of this, will those hospitals be able to rehire quickly enough so that there's not a lag and a delay in getting back to some sort of a normalized environment? That phenomenon is interesting to me, and I'd be interested in your take on that as well as any detail you might be able to be willing to give on the 2 new AngioVac products.
Yes. So 2 things. So again, I don't want to speak for the caregivers and the hospitals. I won't speak for how they're doing it. But I can share with you the conversations we're having and the tone that we're getting. Because it's been pretty consistent, Jason, some of which is right exactly what you're asking for. So we've seen some furloughs as well, some hospitals. And I think if you see the root cause of that, it's because some of the censuses are very low. Some of the hospitals are telling us that the patients census is down because they tried to move people out of the hospitals, get them back home, and they try to free up or create more ICU or critical care spaces, preparing for an influx of COVID-19 patients. So I think that the care they're delivering on a routine basis is much lower than it was a month ago. They need less people. We hope, again, by talking to our hospital customers and partners, that when this thing settles, they can rehire the people back to get back to normal care standards that they would operate in. We also believe, too, even some of the conversations, I think they're doing some of that contingency planning now. If you speak to some of those hospitals, they told us, they're doing some of that contingency planning of how they can get back in a rapid fashion. Some people have told us they may go to a 7-day operating schedule in their operating rooms, to go back and treat people who've had to stand down for a little bit. So on a macro scale, Jason, I think we're all learning together of how we're going to treat this situation. But we're hearing things enough and we're close enough to the market that gives us that hope that when people are ready to start treating people again in a normal situation, we want to be their partner, and we will be ready to partner, as you've seen with the momentum we've already generated this year.
Now back to your initial question on AngioVac. We're not ready to discuss all the details, but we have talked openly in the past publicly the next 2 products we'll launch. So AngioVac 3.0 that was launched in the fall is extremely successful in how it was launched. We redesigned the funnel tip and did a few other things that our physician partners asked us to do. The next version that comes out, which we're not good at naming. AngioVac 4, and we'll probably have a better name for you by the time we launch it, but it's a smaller version. Our physicians that say, "Hey, if you give us the same great features and it's still on pump, on circuit, so can reperfuse the patient's blood, which makes the procedure much less complicated from a patient recovery aspect." We're going to have the AngioVac 4 will be different sizing to allow them to treat more people. And maybe open up a clinical pathway for us to get indications back to the areas that you and I spoke a few minutes ago, and Steve did with PE and other places.
Now the other product, which is really special and unique, we've talked about we want to also use some of the unique features of AngioVac, but take it off the pump and circuit that it's on today. So we want to be able to get to that larger space of people with maybe less acute situations of thrombus, and we want to be able to treat a lot of those patients where we've seen mechanical thrombectomy options in the marketplace being chosen and selected by physicians as a better care of treatment. And some of that, I think, is due to some of the good options that other companies have come out with. We think when we take AngioVac off circuit with its other unique features, will be a really, really competitive option in that space. We think a lot of physicians would like to try our products in that space. And we'll get back to you soon with launch dates there. But that's what we said, Jason, 12 to 18 months, we expect both of those products to launch.
Our next question comes from the line of Matthew Mishan with KeyBanc Capital Markets.
Jim, I just wanted to switch over to oncology first. I think you had an expectation coming into the year where you thought you could do about 20% growth in that area. Definitely looks like it's fallen short over the first 3 quarters and really outside of just some very big numbers in NanoKnife, it looks like the other areas are coming in negative. Can you go through the puts and takes of the balloons, BioSentry and microwave as well?
Yes. Matt, good question. A couple of things. What we've learned during the course of this year, Matt, we did set high expectations based upon our technologies in these areas. What we've learned, let me get back to balloons and BioSentry right now. I think our sales reps, they probably put too much in their bag, and I own that one. I thought while we're there in some of the call points we're in, we can have similar discussions based upon how these 2 new technologies are unique and work well. But in all cases, Matt, the synergies aren't there as much as we want to focus on speaking about what NanoKnife does with our new registry-based approach and the IDE. So what we're doing, Matt, differently now, and we've learned these lessons, we're going to -- we're investing in and creating a new inside sales group that are going to handle the majority of our balloons and BioSentry business to take them out of the field sales bag. We know right now how effective these products are when used for patient care and treatment. But we've got to do a better job of commercializing that conversation. So we've missed the boat a little bit there. So missed it. You're right. What are we doing about it? We're changing how we go to market. That's number one for balloons and BioSentry.
Number two, for microwave, we know and we believe deeply, our microwave is better than the offerings from Medtronic and J&J. What I think we've learned, Matt, it's not that much better to offset some of the market size, clout and resourcing that those 2 giant companies have. So our microwave is better. I think if you match them up, physicians will say, it's a great product. But same thing, Matt, I don't know if we can go toe-to-toe with these guys as the way we thought we could, because we were very encouraged about a year ago with some really good conversions, some big medical centers coming over and buying our microwave versus some of the competitors. And that is still occurring, but not at the rate we thought we could do it with. So we're taking a step back, Matt. And over the course of the summer, [ we launch you ] whenever we can talk to you about our '21 plans. We'll show you how we're realigning ourselves. What we believe, Matt, is over time, microwave growth will probably be closer to market growth, whereas the 20% we pointed to this year, we thought we could really exceed market based on how good our technology was and some initial conversations. I don't know if we can do that, Matt, sustainably. That's why we're going to bring down our own expectations for that product. It will grow nicely with market. It's a great product, but we're going to shift more of our resources to making sure we support NanoKnife growth, support those customers that are choosing to enter our registry, treat people and then collect the data to do so.
And then the final cusp there on NanoKnife, we've already seen how the 3.0 version has been so successfully received. You've seen after 3 quarters, we sold record amounts of capital in either new NanoKnifes or upgrades to the new NanoKnife platform. That's encouraging to us. People really love this new platform. But Matt, we've got to go one step further. NanoKnife is really effective, but it's also complicated to use and is tricky. So training and development of those physician practices are important. We also need to make the next step in technology to make NanoKnife easier to use, and we have that design. It's called H-FIRE or high-frequency IRE. So we're going to put more of the time and development to developing the next platform, which we call H-FIRE, and get this new platform to market as soon as we can, that we think will then maybe match up really nicely with the culmination of our DIRECT study in a couple of years. And we see more and more people who want to use NanoKnife to treat maybe other organs over time. We want to have a platform that's ready to help support that and is easier to use.
So Matt, I gave you a lot out there, but some of that is showing you where we missed, why we missed and what we're doing about it going forward, rather than step back. Yes, go ahead.
Yes. Like you said -- I think that's all fair and very helpful. On NanoKnife, could you give us a sense of how do -- the numbers are very strong as far as the placements going and in the number of probes and the recurring revenue. Could you just give us a sense of how you're doing with that in the U.S. versus you are, like, internationally?
So -- it's a good question. I'll look to Steve, maybe Steve has more of a split on the geographics, Matt. I think right now we've seen a balanced sale with our capital this year, both U.S. and OUS. It's been encouraging, though, Matt, some of the systems that have been bought in the U.S. recently are full systems. These are expensive products. I think people now are getting interested in our DIRECT study and the ability for them to be part of the study and to set up a treatment protocol in their facilities.
So again, as we told you early this year, we knew that the Q3 we just reported this morning had very strong disposable sales as you saw on NanoKnife probes, which was our expectation as we talked to you after Q2. By selling record hardware in the first half of the year, we knew disposables would carry on. I'm not -- I don't want to predict how we'll be now in this quarter in front of us, but it's what we expected.
Yes. And I think, Matt, we are seeing strength, both in the United States and outside the United States. You can think of our current breakdown at about 60% in the U.S., about 40% outside the U.S. We've seen some particular strength in the Asia Pac area outside the U.S. I think we've modified a little bit, mitigated a little bit by EMEA. But we think that that's a temporary trend, and we expect to see EMEA catch up and also be a big contributor going forward. So we have seen strength throughout the globe, driven by the U.S., but definitely some strength OUS as well.
Okay. And then on NanoKnife and AngioVac both, do you need a clinically trained salesperson in the procedure room to make those effective? Or are the doctors that are performing them capable of doing that without an Angio representative in there?
So that's interesting, Matt. Before the world changed recently, I think the answer from both our physicians as well as us in terms of what we were seeing at the time, to that question would have been, yes, you need clinical specialists in those cases. As the world has changed, we've noticed that both our customers as well as our own clinical specialists have been very creative in providing that case support in this dynamic environment. So I think the answer is, at a very high level, yes. I do think that these NanoKnife procedures as well as AngioVac are complicated procedures that there's a tremendous value provided by our clinical specialists and the knowledge that they have. I think what we're seeing through this new environment is the manner in which we support those cases can be somewhat dynamic. And I think that there's an opportunity to be creative in how we do that support going forward. But ultimately, in the type of procedures that they have with the different disease states and the complexity of our products, there is a role that is necessary for some level of support.
Okay. And then just last question on the cash flow. You were able to do breakeven on net income, but free cash flow was negative $20 million. So a little bit more color on really what drove that. And from here, I mean, if you have the levels of inventory in place that you think, how capable are you guys of managing swings, while also preserving your current balance sheet position?
Yes. It's a great question, Matt. And it's absolutely something that we've been focused on over the last 4 weeks. So I think you kind of hit the point that we were looking at pretty critically over the last several weeks and looking at the cash flow versus the net income. There are a couple of points that feed into that change in cash that I think are temporary. And I think you would [ chalk up as ] temporary. So we talked about the inventory build, that's actually a big part of it, right? $4 million to $5 million of that cash usage was in inventory build. Now as we talked about going into the current environment, we were planning to increase our inventories in anticipation of moving all of our lines out of the Glens Falls facility that we sold to Medline into Queensbury. So we had a big build as we were coming in. We have continued to build in the first several weeks of this process. The next aspect of that then is going to be, okay, now that you've got the inventory as a backstop to what could be some potential disruptions depending upon what happens, at least, in terms of our production process, you want to then burn off that inventory, and so we're focusing on that.
There was some short-term additional funding that was acquired during the third quarter related to AURYON into the Israeli R&D aspects there. I think that will pull back a little bit. There was also a lot of timing. $7 million to $8 million of that cash usage, I would say, was in timing related to the TSAs and some of the disaggregation activities coming out of the Medline divestiture. So that won't repeat.
So we talked earlier about focusing on our cash, understanding where we want to continue to invest, so we don't lose momentum in areas like AngioVac, AURYON and NanoKnife, but then being much more controlling in terms of that discretionary spend, the third-party R&D spend in all the other products. The other thing we're keeping a close eye on, you've got a whole bunch of expenses that end up not being spent just by the very nature of the situation that we're in. The fact that nobody can be traveling, T&E goes way down. So we're keeping a close eye on that. We feel really good that we're going to be able to maintain our strong foundational cash position through this downturn. We talked a little bit about initiating that draw. As both an opportunity to keep our eye on the cash flow and make sure that we've got the right cash balances that we need, but then also illustrate our strength. We're not looking to draw the entire revolver. It's not a prudent thing to do at this time. It's not something that we need to do at this time.
So we feel pretty comfortable that we'll be able to maintain that cash position by reducing our expenses that we've talked about, not cutting into those areas that we want to make sure are going to maintain momentum when it's time to come out of that. And then also seeing some of those onetime timing things that we saw in Q3 not repeat as we head into Q4 and then into the first half of our FY '21.
Ladies and gentlemen, this concludes our question-and-answer session. I'll turn the floor back to Mr. Clemmer for any closing remarks.
So thank you for joining us today for our quarter 3 2020 call. I'd like to, again, call out the dedication and commitment of our employees. We have manufacturing, quality and distribution people working today in Queensbury and Glens Falls, New York. They've worked over the past 3 or 4 weeks during this pandemic process with their commitment to manufacturing high-quality products that are used around the globe in the care and treatment of those in need of care.
We've done a good job here at AngioDynamics, helping to make their workplace as safe as we can make it and reduce risks of transmission internally. We've changed how we do what we do. We made sure that our people are thought of first. So we've got a great group of people. We're proud to report our good Q3 results today. We look forward to sharing with you our Q4 results and beyond. And I think we did a good job highlighting today just some of the uncertainty we see from our customers. As soon as we can get better clarity and transparency from our customers, we'll be happy to share with you our new thinking when that occurs. But today, our company is driven by a belief that our products make a difference in the wellness and care of others. The company is committed to that. I want to thank our employees for working through this difficult process. Thank you. We'll speak with you soon.
Thank you. This concludes today's teleconference. You may disconnect your lines at this time. Thank you for your participation.
Welcome to Bank7 Corp.'s first Quarter earnings call.
Before we get started, I'd like to highlight the legal information disclaimer on Page 21 of the investor presentation. For those who do not have access to the presentation, management is going to discuss certain topics that contain forward-looking information, which is based on management's beliefs as well as assumptions made by information currently available to management. Although management believes that the expectations reflected in such forward-looking statements are reasonable, they can give no assurance that such expectations will prove to be correct. Such statements are subject to certain risks, uncertainties and assumptions, including, among other things, the direct and indirect effect of economic conditions on interest rates, credit quality, loan demand, liquidity and monetary and supervisory policy of banking regulators. Should one or more of these risks materialize or should underlying assumptions prove incorrect, actual results may differ materially from those expected.
Also, please note that this conference call contains certain references to non-GAAP financial measures. You can find reconciliations of these non-GAAP financial measures to GAAP financial measures in an 8-K that was filed by the company this morning.
Representing the company on today's call, we have Brad Haines, Chairman; Tom Travis, President and CEO; J.T Phillips, Chief Operating Officer; Jason Estes, Chief Credit Officer; Kelly Harris, Chief Financial Officer; and Henry Litchfield, General Counsel.
With that, I'll turn the call over to Tom Travis.
Thank you. Thanks for joining us today. We begin by acknowledging the pain that's inflicted upon our fellow citizens in country, especially our friends in places like New York, who've been hit especially hard. We support and appreciate the efforts being made all across the country, especially the work of our medical professionals and first-line defenders, and we stand together to defeat and overcome the terrible pandemic. It truly it is a terrible time.
It's also wonderful to see so many aspects of American exceptionalism coming together. Government policies, the treasury department, the SBA, the USDA, the state banking department, the Federal Reserve, everyone working closely with citizens in the private sector. We're grateful for everyone's efforts.
I'd like to take a moment to congratulate and thank the Bank7 team members for their tireless work.
We truly have an exceptional company. Our plan to work remotely was put in place very quickly and has functioned very well. Our operations and IT groups have us working seamlessly. We're very proud of their efforts.
I also want to thank Jason Estes, our Chief Credit Officer, and the entire centralized credit function. They quickly and professionally enabled us to handle loan modifications in the new PPP loans in a very efficient manner.
Last but not least, our lenders and their support staff in every location have done an excellent job, and I personally have received many calls and e-mails from customers thanking us, and frankly, noncustomers who bank at large banks but who had asked us for help, the strength of community banking is revealing itself yet again.
We are certainly aware that in a matter of weeks, our country changed from a vibrant and booming economy to one with severe economic stress. After all is said and done, we expect to had experienced the most sudden and severe recession in the modern history of our country. There is no consensus on how far we will fall, and no one has ever predicted or encountered the speed at which GDP and unemployment have been negatively impacted.
We also know that this pandemic-induced stress has caused an immediate and severe liquidity crunch, which is now morphed into a credit crisis. What is very important to remember is this stress began as a liquidity event, not underlying credit issues unlike 2008, when the banking system was burdened with excessive leverage, especially when you include off-balance sheet items. The industry entered into this period with extreme strength.
Clearly, challenges are everywhere. Our industry will face increased credit risk, margin pressure, stress to our customers and team members and additional threats related to IT intrusions and cybercrimes. Regardless, we remain very focused on our credit book, liquidity, capital levels, expense discipline and internal operations. We have closely analyzed our extreme stress scenarios and are using those in conjunction with our deep transactional knowledge. That's what guides us.
We are comforted most by the thorough involvement between experienced credit executives who work with lenders and their customers. Our stress scenario is very severe. And if it materializes, we remain confident of our revenue stream and the shock absorption capability of earnings and capital. This is why we expect to continue to pay our dividend. However, we will watch very closely as we move through the next weeks and few months. We will continue to provide timely quality information, but we also know events are unfolding and happening at a rapid pace, so it will take continuous effort.
Now let's move into our data. Our focus will be on pretax, pre-provision earnings and how that combines with our already strong capital cushion to provide strength to our already strong balance sheet. Reflecting back to the January earnings call, we were very excited about 2020, which was largely due to our strong loan pipeline, some of which had already been booked. Our projected loan growth for the first quarter did in fact occur. Therefore, our results reflect what we had anticipated a very solid quarter. Our pretax, pre- provision income was very high and consistent with our history.
In our slide deck, we have highlighted one of the great strengths -- one of our great strengths, our wide profit margin. It rapidly adds to our already robust capital levels. Therefore, even with the uncertain future, we are comforted that we will continue to add to our equity cushion. We are very proud of our strength in this area. In the current financial market of environment of "shoot first, ask questions later," let's start with a refresher on Bank7 and how we were built on tried and true fundamentals.
We're a company that provides commercial banking services to companies and their owners. In fact, 98% of our loans are commercial-purpose loans. We deliver the products and services using a branch-like model. Bank7 and its bankers are very close to customers. We're relationship bankers, not transactional bankers. We have virtually no participations or Shared National Credits. We have decades of successful improving credit discipline that has enabled us to avoid meaningful losses. We typically stay away from prevalent throughout our loan book, and that is one of the contributing factors to our historically low net charge-offs.
Essentially, it is more of a needs-based loan book, not a flashy one. You can easily glean that when you review our home construction loan metrics and our hospitality loan book. We consistently maintain a strong NIM. And those factors, combined with our superb efficiency ratio and revenue per employee metrics to produce those wide margins and consistently strong profits which provides our healthy shock absorption cushion. The result is high levels of capital with 98% of our capital being tangible capital, good old-fashioned common stock and retained earnings. I would also add that we remain debt-free. In addition, we also maintained very strong on balance sheet liquidity.
So now let's take a minute and review just a few of those fundamental components, and we'll start with capital. We entered into this pandemic-induced period of uncertainty with very high levels of capital. Included in our slide deck are 2 very important illustration: one that illustrates a significant cushion of capital and the other being a comparison of our pretax, pre-provision run rate as compared to 192 of the smaller exchange-traded banks. You can see our margins are far better. Again, not only did we enter the current crisis with heavy capital levels, our strong margin rapidly adds to our capital base, much faster than most other banks. We are very mindful that the near-term future is full of uncertainty. Nonetheless, we remain confident in our capital strength. The combined efforts from government, the Fed, private industry customers and teammates will enable us to successfully work through the upcoming months and prevent us from experiencing a negative impact to our capital base. Our confidence is further evidenced by the fact that none of the shares owned by our insiders have been sold, not one share. We have far more at stake in this company than anyone else.
Now if we move into another primary component, our net interest margin. We constantly maintain an excellent NIM. As highlighted in our January call, the fourth quarter NIM was very strong, and we had expected that strength to carry into 2020. However, none of us anticipated the sharp and sudden decline in interest rates. Looking forward into the rest of the year, the industry and Bank7 will experience downward pressure on NIM, with most of the pressure appearing in the latter part of the year. Nonetheless, we still expect to maintain our NIM within historical ranges. And remember, we achieved that by being disciplined with our floors. In fact, based on the most recent Fed rate cut, 92% of our loans are either fixed or already at their floors.
Our customer relationships are strong and deep, and our customers know we are reliable partners. And when absolute borrowing rates are this low, there is less pressure from them to lower rates. We also did not allow lenders to negotiate lower rates or floors without executive management involvement and oversight. Each customer requesting a rate or floor reduction is logged into a spreadsheet maintained by the finance department, and each request is evaluated by the lender and executive management. For the first quarter, we had $55 million of loans, which is 7% in the portfolio that was repriced downward at an average repricing downward of 82 basis points. And remember, during this time, the Fed dropped rates by 150 basis points.
So now let's spend a minute on liquidity. Bank7 has historically maintained very good liquidity, typically holding between $75 million and $125 million of cash at the Fed, which is a very substantial amount of money for a company our size, and we continue to operate in that manner. This pandemic-induced stress clearly began as a liquidity event, which quickly morphed into a systemic credit crisis.
Having said that, this clearly is not your father or grandfather's liquidity crisis. The U.S. government and Fed interventions are unprecedented, far-reaching, spread across the board, and those actions combined with a fully entrenched digital electronic currency system have clearly calmed the markets. For the consumer segment, the ability to instantly and seamlessly provide funds to pay for goods and services have significantly reduced consumer panic, which is a good thing, as consumer sentiment is fragile, but will be critical to help the economy recover. After all, 70% of GDP is consumer spending.
Lawmakers, the treasury department, the state banking department and the Fed have demonstrated their commitment to provide multiple backstops to the entire monetary system, and that has added stability to the markets. In fact, when you look at the Fed's most recent H8 data, it is quite revealing. On a year- over-year basis, commercial loans are up in the 25% range, pretty much unprecedented.
You may ask how the loan growth comment relates to liquidity, and that is due to many companies drawing on credit facilities and simply redepositing the money into the banking system. That same H8 data shows annualized deposit growth on a year-over-year basis that is also in the double digits, the strongest anyone can remember. The Fed actions and U.S. government programs are temporarily propping up the economy. And ironically, the liquidity crisis is quickly abated as evidenced by so much money that's ended up in the U.S. banking system.
On top of all of that, the global flight to safety has caused international liquidity to flow into the U.S. and our banking system, with liquidity being sufficient, the long hard work of economic recovery will soon begin. I would argue it's already begun. Another tool to support liquidity is the new Fed funding facility for our PPP loans, which we are utilizing and taking full advantage of, and that allows us to preserve our liquidity for normal banking needs.
Last but not least is credit quality. We are mostly in uncharted waters. However, there are a few moments in history that can help us understand what a recovery might look like. We can refer to the devastating floods in Houston, events such as Hurricane Katrina. In those cases, the insurance industry provided a major backstop compared to today when the government programs and tax policy which will be the primary drivers to help with recovery. We realize this pandemic is far-reaching in different. Nonetheless, we remain confident that our asset quality will remain relatively strong as our underwriting principles and long-time customer relationships have always carried us through the toughest of times.
Our confidence is also based on one primary underlying assumption, which is that the pandemic induced stress is a near-term to medium-term event with America returning to a more normalized environment sooner rather than later. Clearly, a longer period of continued stress will cause or would cause greater uncertainty, and our complete economic recovery will largely depend on how long it takes the country and its citizens to emerge from their homes and get back to work and their lives. Even when that occurs, there will be a new normal, which no one can yet predict, but it is certain that consumer behaviors will change, which will benefit some industries but harm others. Therefore, we expect an uneven recovery. One key factor and strength of Bank7 that must be remembered is our strategy of loaning into more of the blue- collar types of projects and segments, essentially a more needs-based segment.
You can especially see that by reviewing the stratification data within the hospitality and CRE segments. Experience has taught us that economic downturns typically hit the more leverage and higher-end segments especially hard. We also know that past recessions have revealed the strengthen in what we call the cycle-down segments of the economy. We are very confident of our loan book. Being mindful of the heightened scrutiny surrounding credit quality, we have provided enhanced reporting to our energy, hospitality and CRE segments. Our enhanced reporting was provided with a view towards maintaining customer privacy as well as being aware that competitors also review materials.
So with that being said, let's ask Jason Estes, our Chief Credit Officer, to walk us through the credit book.
Thank you, Tom. With all due respect to the pandemic and the challenges in the world, we had a really strong first quarter in our loan book. Our credit metrics were in line with recent results. We had minimal past due loans, no charge-offs and a reduction in our NPAs. We also had a nice shift in our loan mix as we continued to decrease the energy portion of the portfolio, which now stands at 12% versus 18% of balances a year ago, and this trend is expected to continue. The largest increase was to our C&I book, as we successfully added several clients -- several large clients. Now as the month of March progressed, our markets began to be impacted by the pandemic. Being in the middle of the country, it was a little slower than on the coast. Our first loan modification related to the pandemic was done on March 15. And at the end of the quarter, we only had 25 loans that had been modified. I'd like to dive in a little bit to Slides 11 and 12 in the slide deck related to our hospitality portfolio.
We all know this space was impacted quickly by the pandemic. But long term, we remain confident in our customer base about a month ago was that occupancy had dropped all the way down to 5% to 10% in many cases. More recent reports are that they are already experiencing improved occupancy levels with the majority of properties, 2/3 of ours reporting that occupancy rates are already above 30%. 10 of our 34 operating properties report that the last 10 days, they've operated above 50% occupancy. Now full recovery for this industry is expected to take 2 to 3 years. On average, our operators need about 50% occupancy in order to amortize their debt. We believe the recovery to 50% occupancy will take much less than 2 to 3 years. As Tom stated, we remain committed and confident in this segment and our loan portfolio overall.
Now shifting to the energy industry. We have continued to reduce our energy exposure and are well positioned to handle any losses that may materialize from this sector as we presented on Slide 13. Bank7 has been actively reducing our energy lending activity for over a year because the industry was already dealing with a price and supply-driven slowdown. Now the pandemic has destroyed demand and the industry devastation is being well documented. The energy recovery will be slower, and it appears that there will be a lasting impact on companies and the industry overall.
Consistent with prior quarters, we continue to experience migration within the service industry portfolio. Our borrowers in the service segment, now they've been through many cycles, but this one appears to be more severe, at least going into it. Within our portfolio, the E&P and midstream segments continue to perform at a high level in spite of current pricing conditions. I would also like to add briefly on our commercial real estate portfolio. Our construction portfolio concentration has been at multiyear lows over the past couple of quarters. We continue to focus on low-to-moderate priced homes and also expect to see a reduction in our hotel construction activity as projects are delayed while the economy recovers. Our exposure to retail land and lots is minimal and will continue to be that way.
And with that, I'd like to hand it back over to Tom.
Thank you, Jason. It's a good report on the credit side of the bank. So as we move forward, consumer sentiment is going to be the key to the recovery. People are simply not going to venture out unless they feel safe. This recovery will be different for that reason. Over the past decades, the gradual conversion of our economy into a service-based consumer-driven economy is highlighting how critical consumer sentiment will be to the recovery. It also happens to be why modeling is more difficult as older metrics just are not as reliable. A good reminder of that is that manufacturing now only accounts for approximately 11% of our GDP compared to 70% of GDP from consumer spending. Our focus will continue to be on our fundamentals. We'll continue to produce pretax, pre-provision earnings to create that strong foundation.
Our branch-light model has held up very well in the social distancing environment. It was not a big adjustment for our customers and staff. We're not saying it's business as usual, but we were able to easily adapt. We've always been very close to our customers. We have been very proactive talking to them, making sure they know we're here for them. Our strength of deep customer relationships and interaction has been obvious to us and to them, and we'll continue to do so.
We also know that government stimulus programs and flexibility on future tax rates and measures will contribute to help us emerge and more quickly recover, and we'll stay abreast of all those items. We also will pay extra attention to our digital platform. System uptime has been good and generally speaking has withstood unparalleled traffic spikes. We will evaluate redundancies and system reliability metrics as we know that many people are now accessing the digital offerings and stressing our platforms.
So as we wrap up, we would also like to say that we're seeing green shoots begin to emerge. There are flows of capital seeking opportunities. We intend to be vigilant, but also pay close attention to smart opportunities. In fact, we have a few opportunities right now that are very strong and very safe. In these times, being nimble yet prudent with additional long-term customer opportunities, especially with companies that have worked with large banks and experienced lackluster responses related to the PPP could use if we haven't yet is a new main street lending program, but we'll evaluate as they go forward. So wrapping up, we thank you for your time, and we'll open it up with any questions you might have.
[Operator Instructions] And the first question comes from Brady Gailey with KBW.
So buybacks were notable in the quarter. Do you still have excess capital with tangible common equity at around 10%? How are you all thinking about buybacks going forward?
Brady, we've been consistent that our view of stock repurchases is based on 2 factors: First, whether the price is a bargain; and second, is it consistent with our long-term goals, which balance shareholder returns and having adequate capital available for expansion -- future expansion. As you know, we've commented that we've -- historically, we've seen many companies buy back stock with a view of boosting EPS, not necessarily based on buying at a bargain price, essentially more of a short-term perspective.
And we've also said that we understand that people are entitled to follow that type of program, but our strategy is different. And so when this turmoil began, we observed a severe price drop, and we knew our strong earnings and capital cushions were sufficient, so we began executing on that strategy. So with that being said, specifically to your question, we're not going to deviate from that perspective and that strategy. We don't have a specific number in mind. We don't have predetermined expansion plans right now, but we feel really good about our company and where it is. And J.T. made a comment the other day regarding opportunities. And we feel like that the best buy we could make, whether looking at buying a bank with our own stock absolutely, right?
All right. That's fair. And then you mentioned your activity with the P3 plan from the SBA. Maybe just update us how much -- how many PP loans have you done so far? I think most banks are enjoying roughly a 3% fee on those loans? Is that roughly the fee that you guys are expecting here?
Yes. So the first wave, we put on about $45 million of fundings related to the PPP program. And our expected fee generation, I believe it was around 2.9%. So really close to in line with your 3% estimate from others.
Okay. All right. And then lastly for me, just the hospitality portfolio. I mean it's notable with you guys at a little over 20%. I appreciate all the colors around LTVs and what the vacancy can go to, et cetera. I mean just bigger picture, is this a portfolio that you are concerned about over the next few months? Or do you think even with a shelter in place for another couple of months, this book will still perform relatively okay?
Yes. I expect this book to perform relatively okay, to use your words. We're confident in these borrowers. They've got lots of operating history. We went and pulled kind of the 10 biggest groups, and there wasn't -- none of them had less than 23 years of experience. And so they're in this for the long haul. And so are we.
I would say, too, Brady, that the -- you cannot underestimate the drive-to market component compared to the gateway cities like the coasts of East and West Coast. And you're already seeing there will be many, many more people that will get in the car and they will drive to certain places. And we've got that leisure limited service. It's not business convention hotels. It's not dependent on people coming in from international travel. And when you think about that, you can easily see that the portfolio is going to do much better. And as Jason said in his comments, I think it was 9 properties. I forget the percentage, 1/3 or so. There are 10 properties out of 34, 5 that we have that are already above 50%. And it's people that say, I can't go anywhere. Texas is opening up. And so let's go to Dallas for the weekend or let's do this. And so that's our portfolio.
And I would add on Page 12, when you talk about concern and you go down that road to whether people want to speculate if it's 90 days or 6 months before we're back to, pick a number, 70% occupancy, 60%, look on Page 12. And we have a 62% loan-to-value ratio. And so if you think about it in these terms, 70% of our exposure is at Dallas-Fort Worth area, which is a drive-to market. So just a typical hotel, it's a Hampton inn in the Dallas metro area, and the property is worth $5 million, and the borrower owes us $3.1 million. And so are we worried if there's a 90-day to 6-month temporary hiccup to their cash flow? Absolutely not. And this is an example of the dynamics of a combination of more of a blue-collar perspective and the dynamic market that we're in, especially the drive-to segment.
Now one final comment I'd make. I read a piece this morning that there's a lot of belief out there that the Americas national parks are going to be really, really busy because people are going to want to get in their cars and go cross country and do things. And so it's another example of the importance of being a drive- to market and a leisure and combination market and not business convention or gateway cities like the coasts.
And the next question comes from Matt Olney with Stephens.
I think you mentioned in prepared remarks that the overall level of loan deferments and modifications with pretty modest as of March 31. Do you have anything more recently as far as the modifications or deferments that you can disclose in the portfolio, especially around the hotel and energy segments?
Yes. I'll go -- I've got overall portfolio details. And then I'll touch a little bit on the other 2 segments. But overall, through the 28th of April, which -- what's today -- 2 days ago, approximately 10% of our total notes have been modified. Now they represent about 30% of our outstanding loan balances, and that's 2/3 made up of the hospitality segment. So of the operating properties, just the program was -- and all of these modifications that we've done have been 2 to 3 months of either interest-only or 2 to 3 months of no payments. And so in that group, the vast majority of that is the hospitality segment.
Got it. Okay. That's helpful. And then within the hospitality segment, any -- were there any past dues or any potential problem loans before March? Just trying to appreciate if there are any kind of laggards in the portfolio that could be hit especially hard, given that they were already hurting beforehand?
Right. Of the 34, there was 1 property that was approximately 30 days past due going into the problem or the pandemic, I shouldn't say the problem, the pandemic.
And did that loan qualify for a modification under -- or I should ask it this way. Under the current regulatory guidelines, did that loan qualify to be modified without penalty?
It does. It does. And we'll see what happens with that one property. The owners are working on a few different options. So we'll see, but yes, it qualifies.
Got it. And then on the energy portfolio, can you just review what -- what your expectation is of the size of that book? I mean do you expect that to shrink as some of these loans amortize over time? Or do you expect it to remain a similar size? Just curious what your expectations are?
My expectations are that the existing portfolio would shrink somewhat throughout the year. But you have to be careful here, remember, through the last downturn, we were presented with several opportunities that made sense for us to extend credit. And though, overall, I expect energy to make up less of our portfolio long term, it would not surprise me if we're opportunistic and have a few really nice opportunities that make long-term sense to extend credit.
Okay. Got it. And then I guess switching over on thinking about the margin and with the Fed actions in March, I'm curious what your thoughts are about keeping that core margin ex the fees above the low end in that range that we've discussed before, which I think is around 4.50% to 4.60%.
We think we're going to be within our historical ranges, where is the low point the last 5 years.
Yes. I mean we think we're going to be within historical ranges.
And can you just clarify those historical ranges, I was thinking 4.50% to 4.60%, but was there something below that, that it could be temporarily?
If you looked at the NIM page -- what page is it?
Executive VP & Chief Credit Officer 2016, it was 4.37% for core NIM, if I remember right.
The Page 8. Yes, it was 4.37% ex fee.
Got it. Okay. That's helpful. And then you disclosed some good stuff in the deck around the construction book, especially around single-family construction and developments and lot exposure, and it seems like a pretty small amount. But I'm just curious, how do you typically underwrite those loans in terms of loan to values and loan to cost?
On the 1-to-4 family houses, that's 100% centered in Oklahoma City and Dallas metroplexes. And so standard 80% loan-to-value. Those builders -- I'm trying to think -- I think we have 1 builder that's new to our portfolio in the past year, but that was banked by lenders that work here that worked with other institutions, and it worked with the borrower previously. So we really kind of have a stable group of builders that we support. And it's a segment that we don't have any significant concerns within that portfolio.
And what are the policies around the lot and the land development loans?
In general, we don't do much of that, but the policies are 75% loan-to-value max, but I would give you specific data points, but there's really not enough in there to create a meaningful statistic to quote you. I mean, our -- typically, the developments that we do would be for larger homebuilders that we bank that are building their own lot inventory to chew up over -- I think in terms of 2 years, maybe 3 years max for their absorption, but typically, it's going to be 12 months to 24 months of absorption, and they're the specific end user. It's more of a means to an end, not really a product that we go out in the market.
Okay. Yes. And I appreciate it. It's definitely a smaller size. So I definitely appreciate that. On the energy book, I think you guys answered all my questions. Great disclosures there on Slide 13. I appreciate you guys. Given us some updated stuff around how you guys view the risk of that portfolio. So great stuff.
Thank you.
And the next question comes from Nathan Race with Piper Jaffrey.
Just going back to the energy book, not to beat the dead horse, but just curious if you guys can remind us how that portfolio fared during the late 2015, 2016 downturn, and just maybe how that portfolio has changed in composition. It sounds like you guys have been able to onboard some new clients in the wake of that disruption that we saw 5 or 6 years ago. So just curious how you guys look at the portfolio today versus back then and just kind of how the book generally performed from a credit quality perspective during that period?
Yes. If I can take that, Nate, we lost $10,000 in the history of the bank on net charge-offs to the energy book. And then as far as what happened between '14 and 16, we were opportunistic, but they were very short-term in and out transactions while people were accumulating properties. And so it was in and out, in and out. Then I would say finally, the one significant change compared to 2014, '15 and '16 is we have a little bit more in midstream than we did back then.
Got it. That's super helpful. I appreciate that, Tom. And then just going back to C&I growth in the quarter, obviously, fairly strong. Just curious maybe how much of that was line of credit draws? Or is it just kind of typical blocking and tackling and taking share?
Yes. Virtually none of it was line of credit draws. That was new clients coming online.
Okay. It's great to hear. And then just general thoughts on just kind of the general lower-to-middle market commercial pipeline. Obviously, some macro slowdown and headwinds on that front. But just curious on how you guys kind of think about that overall book growing. I imagine, to your point, maybe energy and hospitality slows a little bit, along with construction in some places. But generally speaking, how you guys see the loan pipeline today and that kind of extrapolate out into net growth over the back half of this year as well?
If I could take that one, it's quite interesting because you're really into people's psyche. And I liken it to out. And so we have this long experience, and we have this great confidence, and we like our book and we like our markets, and we see opportunities. But honestly, there aren't that many people that are interested in asking. And there are -- as I said earlier, there are people that are more opportunistic. And they're starting to appear, but it's certainly not a big a large group of people.
And so I think that that's going to evolve over the next 4 to 6 weeks, and it goes back to the virus and the testing and what's it going to look like in 4 to 6 or 8 weeks and you people feel safe enough and our model works. And we're going to be there when people are ready, but we really are keenly focused on opportunities, especially not to pick on the larger banks. However, we have some really interesting -- I wouldn't say horror stories. But clearly, the larger banks just didn't get it done the way the community banking segment did. And that has already created opportunities for us with really good groups, not desperate people, not people that don't know what they're doing, but people that are really strong. And so we would say that any meaningful growth, I would imagine, would be later in the year.
Got it. That's super helpful. And then kind of along those lines, core deposit growth was pretty strong in the quarter. And it sounds like you guys seen some good opportunities in front of you to continue to take share as well. So just curious if you expect that to also translate into pretty solid core lending growth over the next few quarters, at least, just given some of that disruption that you spoke to, Tom?
Yes. We would think. We would think it would continue the way it has. And the government programs have been very helpful to the entire country.
Right. And then so I guess along those lines, with us at 0 rates and a lot of your loan book, I think you said 90% at floors that's floating. Is there the potential that we could see some margin expansion in the back half of the year just as that core deposit growth unfolds and you're able to maybe run off some higher cost sources of funds?
It would be really nice, but I don't think anybody in the room is predicting margin expansion. I don't know J.T. or Kelly or...
No.
Yes.
Sorry, just to clarify, not in the second quarter, but perhaps later on in the year.
No. I think when things become more normalized, I think you could see the other side of the coin, and that would be people pushing and saying can I get our rate lowered.
Okay. Got you. And again, really appreciate all the disclosures in the deck. Super helpful. But just to clarify on the hospitality and hotel book, you may have alluded to this, but what was the most recent occupancy rate on average across the portfolio as you have it today?
Yes. So what we have is -- of the 34 that we're operating over the last 10 days, I didn't average it. I went through and did different breaks of. There were 10 that were above 50%. And then 2/3, so 2/3 is 34, whatever that math works out to be, I can't remember what it was, but I just have my notes with me. 2/3, so call it, roughly 20 or a little more were operating above 30%. So between 30 and 50 -- or between more than 30 and then 10 of those were above 50%.
Okay. And that's all the 43 total hotels in the portfolio.
Understood. Okay. I appreciate the clarification.
Certainly. Thank you.
Operator 34. The 43 total, that includes under construction, nonoperational. And so when I'm talking about operating properties, that's the 34 property set.
Thank you. And the next question comes from Tim Abbott with Two Lions Management (sic) [ Twin Lions Management ].
Congrats on the strong results, and thanks for all the disclosure. So I guess first question, you mentioned that most of your hotel sponsors only need 45% to 55% occupancy to amortize their loans. I guess my question is what ADR is embedded in that assumption? Is it based on 2019 ADR?
We -- it's historical, and we tend to gravitate towards RevPAR and so -- and I don't have a RevPAR number either. Just to say that under normal typical environments, the -- we spend a lot of time when we make a loan. We do a stress test before we make a loan, and we make these assumptions. But when this pandemic hit, we went out to the top 5 that we have, and these gentlemen have been in this business for between 20 and 40 years and second generation and some of them own 50 properties. Some of them have 20. And we specifically said, where do you need to be, just give us a number to reach debt service. And the answer was, it depends on if it's a limited -- super limited service, call it a Motel 6-type property or Quality Inn. It was 45%. And then if you get up to, call it, a Hampton inn or a Marriott Courtyard, it was environment, even if they only have 50% of the hotel occupied, they can drive enough of a room rate and create enough of a RevPAR to make debt service.
Got it. Okay.
And that's one of the reasons it's a very interesting parallel. It's very similar to Bank7. In our slide deck, we had pointed out on Page 3, the -- one of the great strengths of Bank7 is our margin, fat margins compared -- or wide margins, I should say, compared to other banks. And that's data that's just irrefutable data. Well, our customer base is very similar. These are not people that are highly leveraged or people that are in properties with a lot of staff. They have very wide margins. And so there is much less pressure on them to run at 70% or 80% occupancy. There are similarities there.
Got it. And then my other question is on rate floors. So I think you said that 92% of your book is now at a rate floor after the 150 basis points of reductions. Do you know what that number was, what percentage of the book was already at a rate floor prior -- immediately prior to the most recent round of rate cuts, I guess, like kind of end of February?
Kelly has that number?
Yes. It was 83% prior to the rate cut.
I'm good. You all did a great job.
Okay. Great. Thank you.
Prior to the 50 basis point rate cut. And that was already 83. Okay. Got it.
[Operator Instructions] All right. As there is nothing more at the present moment, I would like to return the floor to management for any closing comments.
No, we appreciate the involvement today. We're excited to move forward and cautiously optimistic that we're going to all get past this terrible condition that we're in and work together, and we appreciate anyone that's along for the ride with us, and we're keeping all of our money in this -- not all of our money, but we're substantially invested in this company, and we haven't sold any. So we're excited to move forward. Brad, do you have any comments?
Thank you. And this concludes today's conference call. Thank you for attending today's presentation. You may now disconnect your lines.
Greetings. Welcome to the Blonder Tongue Fourth Quarter 2019 Earnings Call. [Operator Instructions]
I will now turn the conference over to your host, Ted Grauch. You may begin.
Great. Thank you. Good morning, everybody. Welcome to Blonder Tongue's 2019 Q4 and Full Year Financial Reporting Conference Call. Thank you for joining us this morning. And I'd like to take a moment to thank the entire Board of Directors and our management team for putting their trust in me in my new role as President and CEO since January 1 this year.
Before we begin our presentation, I'd like to remind all callers that my statements and those made by other Blonder Tongue representatives speaking today will contain forward-looking statements regarding future events, including the management's view of our prospects, financial performance, technology -- technological developments and the evolving trends in the marketplace.
As you know, the future is impossible to predict. So I caution you that actual results may differ from those that may be projected in our comments this morning. For additional information concerning factors that could cause actual results to differ from the information that we will be discussing this morning, I would ask you to refer to our prior SEC filings, including our 10-Q filings for the first, second and third quarters of 2019 as well as for prior years, our upcoming 10-K for 2019 and for past years 2018 and 2017 and our 8-Ks.
With me today are Steve Shea, Chairman of the Board of Blonder Tongue Laboratories; and Eric Skolnik, our Chief Financial Officer and Senior Vice President. Our remarks will follow in the same sequence. Following our presentations, all of us will be available to answer any questions you might have during the Q&A session.
Blonder Tongue completed 2019 with net sales of $19,842,000, which was a decrease of 8.6% below the $21.7 million we reported for 2018. These reduced sales resulted in a net loss of $742,000 contrasted with a net loss of $1.339 million in 2018. These losses were a direct result of reduced sales volumes in DOCSIS-compliant modem and CMTS products as well as declines in a particular line of digital video and coding products and traditional HFC distribution technology. Those losses were partially compensated for by an increase in sales in our NXG digital video signal processing platform and our new CPE set-top box systems initiative.
These results are in no way acceptable to the company, its management or to our Board of Directors. The company has already taken a number of measures to improve our future performance and are planning and currently implementing additional changes, some of which we will touch on during the call today. Although the overall results in 2019 were not acceptable, the company did have a number of specific positive accomplishments and successes during the year that we are building on for 2020 and that we consider significant towards achieving our short- and mid-term goals.
But before we get into specific actions taken as a result of our 2019 performance, I would like to cover details of the company's status and what we've been dealing with regarding the current COVID-19 situation. Blonder Tongue falls into an essential business category due to our U.S.- based manufacturing, engineering design and sales of telecommunications equipment. That equipment goes out to a large number of telephone, cable and municipal fiber optic service operators around the country, both large and small. The company has been able to remain open for business through the crisis.
Beginning in very early February, the company began implementing enhanced cleaning and disinfecting processes on a daily basis at our primary manufacturing and headquarters facility in Old Bridge, New Jersey. The team has been updating those cleaning and precautionary practices on a constant basis over the last 2 months, as additional information about the virus and its attributes have been better understood and reported.
Additionally, in early March, we moved all roles capable of being performed as work-from-home to be done from home company-wide and adapted our operational processes accordingly. I'd like to thank our Vice President of Operations and Head of Manufacturing, Allen Horvath for his foresight on these topics and to all his staff for all the proactive actions that they took while the pandemic was in its early stages in the U.S.
I would also like to specifically mention and say a special thanks to our manufacturing, warehouse and shipping staff, to their direct management and to our process and industrial engineers and our service and support teams for their extraordinary efforts during this difficult time, keeping our factory running and fulfilling orders. These are all clearly jobs and positions that cannot be accomplished working from home. And I'd like to thank those staff for adapting to the difficult situations imposed on them during this ongoing crisis. It's these critical staff who have allowed us to keep running.
Also, our thoughts and prayers go out to the families in New Jersey, in nearby New York and all around the country who have been directly impacted by this horrible disease.
As a result of our poor performance during 2019, the company began an active program in Q2 last year to identify and implement operational expense reductions and find ways to operate the business more efficiently. At the same time, we implemented significant sales team reorganizations and increased marketing efforts to support the range of new products and product features that we released during the year last year and preparing for those planned for 2020.
During the second half of the year last year, we incrementally reduced our OpEx by approximately $200,000 per month, and we have continued this work further in Q1 2020, ahead of the current COVID related situation. Although this work is not yet complete, we continue to develop further initiatives for balancing our OpEx with our projected revenue streams in 2020, and we are prepared to implement all possible actions towards ensuring the company returns to a predictable profitability as soon as the current market conditions allow.
As COVID-related business impacts go, it's been a daily and weekly developing situation over the last 2 months. And we begin to see a small but specific -- sorry, we began to see a small but specific attributable slowdown in sales during the last week of February. That small initial impact grew each week through March and ultimately yielded an approximate 30% to 35% reduction in revenues last month versus our forecast. We have immediately responded to that impact with a combination of short-term-oriented expense reductions, including voluntary compensation reductions by all the company's management team, and we've delayed investments and costs.
We've also begun a process of renegotiating several supplier agreements for the specific purpose of allowing us to preserve operating capital and maintaining higher liquidity in the short term to help us through the immediate health and social crisis.
On a positive note, the company has continued to be in very active and open and encouraging discussions with most of our service operator, distributor and integrator customers. By our last count, over 90% remained open for business and actively engaging with us on new purchases, new product and clinical discussions as well as prospective new programs, many of which are being planned -- are planned to deploy during the recovery period we expect.
Further to this, the company separately announced this morning about closing yesterday afternoon of an $800,000 financing round in the form of a subordinated debt, 100% of which has been committed by a combination of company management and Board members. We are also in the process of evaluating additional financing options. Our CFO, Eric Skolnik, will cover details of this raise and associated benefits we've gained with our senior lender and more precise details following my remarks.
The company has additionally been focused on understanding all potential government resources and programs recently made available for companies just like Blonder Tongue Labs dealing with the current crisis in the financial markets. We completed over last weekend and submitted an application this past Monday for the federal government's CARE (sic) [ CARES ] Act Paycheck Protection Program for a requested amount just over $1.7 million, that number being based upon -- calculated by us based on government guidelines. That application included a complete package of extensive supporting documentation.
I do need to caution that the Paycheck Protection Program details, rules and requirements and the individual bank underwriting policies have been fast-moving topics. Both the company and local banks who are administering the program on behalf of the federal government have been on a steep learning curve since early last week.
We can currently offer no assurances or guarantee to ourselves or our investors that Blonder Tongue will be supplied with any of these funds or any other government funds yet. Because of the material amounts involved in this program, we will be providing additional status and other information in the appropriate form: filings, press releases or both as we learn more. And I want to emphasize that we will be running the business now and going forward in the most conservative way possible under the assumption that we will not receive any additional funding sources.
During 2019, the company did accomplish a number of strategically important items, including expanded direct sales of our NXG digital signal processing platform to a number of large- and medium-sized service operators as well as product qualifications and significant progress in the sales process with additional Tier 1 and Tier 2 operators.
We also completed and began to ship at the end of Q4 our world-class ClearView line of IP video transcoders that deliver fantastic video quality, high reliability and digital television compatibility features at an extremely competitive price point. Those are being actively shipped into a number of headend facilities around the country, and we anticipate that the ClearView products have the potential to regain at least a portion of our diminished sales in that sector that we lost in 2019.
Our CPE program began shipping products to customers in February of 2019, and over the following 10 months, we secured direct business with over 45 different service operators. Although CPE has not yet contributed material profitability to the company, it has been important in repositioning the company more squarely as a provider of systems above and beyond our extremely high-quality and reliable transmission and signal processing equipment. We have since been in the process of promoting to those 45 new customers the wider range of Blonder Tongue equipment for managing their future video and high-speed data service delivery needs.
For 2020, we have begun programs aimed at streamlining and greatly improving our working relationships with all our major distribution channel and integration company customers. These are great companies that Blonder Tongue has, in some cases, multiple decade relationships with and who continue to be key partners in our potential future growth. These programs are in progress now with a fundamental goal of increasing the predictability of those portions of our revenue streams.
Now I would like to turn the call over to our Chief Financial Officer, Eric Skolnik. Eric?
Thank you, Ted. Net sales decreased $396,000 or 7.3% to $5,045,000 for the fourth quarter of 2019 from $5,441,000 for the comparable period in 2018. Net loss for the 3 months ended December 31, 2019, was a loss of $3,842,000 or a loss of $0.41 per share compared to a loss of $742,000 or $0.09 per share for the comparable period in 2018.
The decrease in sales is primarily attributed to a decrease in sales of DOCSIS data products, digital video headend products, HFC distribution products and analog video headend products, offset by an increase in sales of NXG IP video signal processing products and CPE products. Sales of DOCSIS data products were $828,000 and $1,017,000. Digital video headend products were $1,232,000 and $2,409,000. HFC distribution products were $637,000 and $872,000. Analog video headend products were $283,000 and $427,000. NXG products were $378,000 and $186,000. And CPE products were $1,286,000 and 0 in the fourth 3 months of 2019 and 2018, respectively.
During the fourth quarter of 2019, the company, in conjunction with the introduction of its new product lines, reevaluated its existing inventory levels. Accordingly, the company wrote $2,327,000 of inventory value, which reduced the gross margin to a gross margin loss of $1,196,000 in the fourth quarter.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net sales decreased $1,865,000 or 8.6% to $19,842,000 in 2019 from $21,707,000 in 2018.
Net loss for the 12 months ended December 31, 2019, was a loss of $742,000 or an $0.08 loss per share compared to a loss of $1,339,000 or a loss of $0.15 per share for the comparable period in 2018. The decrease in sales is primarily attributed to a decrease in sales of DOCSIS data products and digital video headend products, offset by an increase in sales of NXG products and CPE products.
Sales of DOCSIS data products were $2,817,000 and $4,583,000. Digital video headend products were $6,714,000 and $10,308,000. NXG products were $913,000 and $186,000. And CPE products were $3,977,000 and 0 in the 12 months of 2019 and 2018, respectively.
As the company previously announced, it has delayed the filing of its annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, its annual report, in reliance on the extensive -- excuse me, on the reliance on the extension provided by the SEC in light of COVID-19 development. The company plans to file its annual report as soon as practicable. In the annual report, the company expects that the report of its independent registered public accounting firm will include a going-concern qualification.
Although the company has actively taken steps to address operating expenses and liquidity and announced today completion of a financing and a favorable modification to its agreement with its senior lender, there can be no assurance that those actions and others the company intends to take in the future will be sufficient to address the concerns related to the going-concern opinion.
Regarding the above-mentioned financing efforts and as Ted has mentioned, the company entered into a Senior Subordinated Convertible Loan and Security Agreement, the Loan Agreement, with certain investors, the lenders. Pursuant to the loan agreement, the lenders have agreed to provide the company with a term loan facility, the facility, including an initial aggregate Tranche A loan commitment of $800,000, of which $600,000 was advanced at closing on April 8, 2020, and $200,000 will be advanced at a later date.
The loan agreement allows for up to $700,000 of additional loans under the facility, subject to a maximum aggregate amount of $1,500,000 upon the mutual agreement of the parties. The lenders who are directors and executive officers of the company or their affiliates are not obligated to provide loans in excess of the $800,000 committed and/or advanced at closing. The loan agreement has a 3-year term. Interest on loans will accrue at 12% per annum compounded monthly and is payable monthly in kind by the automatic increase of the principal amount of the loans by the amount of the accrued interest payable for the month.
At maturity, the company is obligated to pay the lenders the accreted principal balance of the loans plus any other accrued unpaid interest. The lenders will have the option of converting the principal balance of the loan held by each of them in whole, unless otherwise agreed by the company, into shares of the company's common stock. The conversion price will be determined based upon the volume weighted average trading price of the company's common stock on the NYSE American during the 5 trading days preceding the date of the loan agreement.
A different conversion price may apply to amounts loaned under the facility following the date of the $800,000 initial tranche. The conversion rate is restricted to limit the number of shares issuable upon conversion until the company receives stockholder approval pursuant to applicable NYSE American rules. The company expects to obtain stockholder approval at its June 11, 2020, Annual Meeting of Stockholders.
The company also announced that it and its wholly owned subsidiary, R. L. Drake Holdings, LLC, entered into a consent and amendment to loan agreement and loan documents, the amendment, with MidCap Business Credit LLC, MidCap, the company's existing senior secured lender. The amendment amends the October 25, 2019, loan and security agreement between the parties and provides for the removal of a $400,000 availability block, subject to its reimposition at the rate of $6,666.66 per calendar month, commencing on June 1, 2020. Removal of the block is subject to certain conditions, including the company securing additional equity or debt financing with the financing under the facility described above meeting the requirements of such removal.
Also, we would like to report that the company has applied for a loan for approximately $1.7 million under the Paycheck Protection Program, PPP. The PPP authorizes up to $349 billion in forgivable loans to small businesses to pay their employees during the COVID-19 crisis. The loan or a portion thereof could be forgivable if the company uses the funds for qualified payroll and occupancy costs in the 8-week period succeeding the loan proceeds. The remaining balance of the loan will be payable over 2 years with the first 6 months deferred. The loan would be unsecured and bear interest at 1% per annum. There could be no assurances that the company will receive a loan nor can there be any assurances that any proceeds of the loan will be forgivable. Now I'd like to open the call up to our question-and-answer session.
[Operator Instructions] And our first question is from [ Gregory Irvin ].
Wow, what a difficult time?
Yes. For everyone.
Let's see, where to begin? Number one, I hope we can get the Paycheck Protection loan, given that it's
We've made a combination of operating expense reductions, including targeted efficiency-oriented layoffs last year, and we continued those in the early part of this year. They were very selective and very targeted towards our efficiency goals. And those all preceded us coming to understand the potential and now real impacts of the COVID situation. Since we recognized the impacts of the COVID situation, we've since taken very specific nonefficiency-oriented, but very specific targeted short-term layoffs and furloughs related to match the level of business that we continue to see through March that I mentioned earlier in my remarks. So yes, we have.
Would the ability to get the loan from the Paycheck Protection Program, would that cover -- I guess it wouldn't cover the layoffs or reductions that may have occurred last year, but the ones that you may have to implement now?
So again, all the actions we took that were specific to the current COVID-related situation, we took them short-term actions. The PPP program is giving us the ability to potentially receive some relief in the short term to potentially get us through the, I think in theory, the bulk of the potential impact to the market. So at least I believe that's what the government's intentions are. So our planning revolves directly around that intention of the program. And it also wraps directly around what we will be committed to the government in doing if we receive those funds, and that is to run the business, reverse all of the short-term-related actions that we have on our current staff and run the business at full capacity for the period to help relieve the pressure on the economy and work towards the stated goal of trying to get the economy recovered as quickly as possible. That is our plan, and all the actions that we've done in the short term related to furloughs and short-term layoffs are reversible with very short notice.
Well, that's good to hear. Have -- in the cutback of operating expenses, have -- has that -- have you had to cut into the R&D that may affect the ability to design and roll out products -- needed products in the market?
We've done some, but we've been extremely careful to ensure that the impacts are minimal, and we've done a lot of work talking to our employees related to those reductions. They've been taken with incredible care to ensure that the impact is exactly what it's intended to be, which is very short term, very targeted and that we can recover rapidly after we see the ramp. When we can better predict what we think the ramp is going to look like on the other side of this, we'll be able to recover that capability as quickly as possible. I don't want to go into specific details, but we've done it in the smallest way possible and in the most careful way possible.
The -- do we -- relatedly, do we have the products to match customer needs now? I know there was some discussion of this on the last call. Given that change, the technology transition that I assume is still occurring, are we still able, in the feedback that you get from customers and potential customers, able to meet their needs with the current product lines and the lines under development?
Well, we believe we are meeting their needs, and we're finishing up what we believe are the final sort of straggling features and functions of our NXG product line right now. Those extend to the support of traditional analog television for output on our NXG. They extend to some other sort of affiliated. Frankly, I'd wrap a lot of them up into sort of loose-ends category. The -- we'll be coming out with that capability approximately midyear. We're working on an HD-SDI capability. So all the remaining features and functions of NXG in particular are all based on specific, both large- and medium-sized, customer requests. So we know there's an immediate market for every one of those features and functions we're developing now and we'll be able to ship those products as soon as they're finished in the R&D cycle. So if you fast forward to the Q3 time frame, we're roughly expecting -- I cannot foresee any additional features and functions of NXG that will remain on the road map after Q3 this year, at the current time. So that really gets us to a big milestone, which is not that we can't sell NXG today, but -- because we are, and we're making great sales progress with customers. We're making good actual sales progress with customers. But there are those couple of loose ends that are sort of check, checks and check boxes that qualify us for finishing some sales cycles that we're in the middle of right now. I think beyond that then, we're mostly focused on wrapping up the transcoding features and functions. We launched a great product line at the end of last year called ClearView. That's been -- we've had a great initial success with that. A bunch of customers have lined up current and potential sales. So that's all looking good. So did I answer your question fully?
Yes. What did you think will be the major drivers going forward as far as product lines go? I ask this might have shown incremental growth over the quarter, but failed to do so. That's why I ask what are you banking on as far as product lines go for growth over the next, let's say, the remainder of the year?
Right. So I'll break apart banking on versus upside potential. So what the company is banking on is that our newest video and data transmission equipment in the form of our NXG, our ClearView product, our BIDA products, our CMTS products and some other products show good signs of growth this year, and those are the things we're currently banking on in the current internal company forecasts and planning. The other products, such as CPE, bring a lot of strategic value. They have the potential for being an interesting business on their own. And we're working on those actively, but we're not relying on reluctant those to happen in order to fund the business or fund the growth.
Going -- as you mentioned, going to the CPE sales, there was one sentence in your paragraph today that -- let me read that. It's provided a material -- it hasn't yet provided the material impact that's expected, but it's better positioned the company for future system sales versus individual or function-by-function sales. Could you elaborate a little more on that?
Sure. I mean the history of the company -- put really simply, the history of the company has been to providing really high quality, high reliability, great value-oriented U.S.-built transmission equipment. And so when you're a systems operator like a big Tier 1 or Tier 2 cable or telco or municipal fiber company, you're delivering an entire system, you have to put a whole system together in order to deliver service to customers. And if you're delivering data services, you've got to look at how that data gets through either your HFC or your fiber optic network all the way to the customers' home, or in the case of wireless operators, they're doing that wirelessly in some cases. And if you're video -- if you're providing video services, you've got devices in the home. If you're providing data services, you've got some devices in the home as well. So they -- the operators who are the end users of our equipment, they think of their service offering as being delivered by a complete system. We've traditionally, as a company, picked -- choose -- chosen individual features and functions of that system that we believe we're particularly good at designing and building in mostly traditionally in the transmission side. And so it's in amplification and DOCSIS technology, and it's been encoding -- video encoding, MPEG encoding, audio encoding. We've picked different pieces, where we believe the higher value the company can bring to shareholders in the future is by positioning the company to have both the transmission side, the distribution side and some selective elements of the in-home side where there's a high value and a high sustainable business. So that way, when a customer looks at us -- a service operator customer looks at us, they see more of a company who is looking at the total picture and is more aware of the kind of challenges, technical challenges and financial and service operating challenges that, that customer has. So they tend to treat a systems provider with a little bit higher regard and a little bit closer relationship than they do individual companies who provide individual features and functions. So over the long term, that's where we're trying to do -- bring higher value and change the kind of relationships we have with the end decision-makers in the industry.
I assume then that, that's meant some reorientation of marketing -- sales, marketing as well as manufacturing -- in-house manufacturing as you change your focus or your presentation to various customers?
It's -- quite frankly, it has not been a huge change within the company, and the costs that we took on revenue. So -- I mean I think what we have -- what's helped us in that transmissions we -- in that transition, I should say, which is not complete yet. But what helped us through that change was we have a number of staff that have backgrounds at the systems level. So we already kind of had some untapped resources to apply from a knowledge base perspective in that area. Incrementally, we only added a few staff.
Final question, I think final for now, is the write-down in inventory. Could you comfortably say what that was? What lines that was or that -- those were, and whether you anticipate anything approaching the significance of this write-down in the future?
Well, I'll tell you first, but I want to hand part of this off to Eric, but I want to make sure you understand. We've done significant efforts since we recognized this issue last year to make sure it will not happen again at this kind of level. So I can't give any guarantees, but we've taken significant efforts to focus our attention to the problem, reduce it, work specifically at the kind of operational activities that will, in the future, lend themselves towards the possibility that we have higher numbers of inventory turns on a yearly basis. And that's fundamentally the kind of -- the same kind of activities that will reduce our risk of being in that situation in the future. But to answer your specific questions on product lines, Eric, do you have some data you feel like you can...
Yes. I would prefer not to move down to the actual details of that. But I agree with everything that Ted said from a prospective basis that we take in steps necessary to assure that this level will not occur in the future if we're able to succeed our goals.
Right. Well, it was obvious to me or seemingly, like, it was going to have to happen at some time because the inventory was just climbing over the last 3, 4, 5 quarters. So it's no great surprise. Just hope don't have anything as large as that again. And as you said, get things down to where the turnover is a little greater.
It's a critical metric going forward, it really is.
Yes. Well, you'll have to excuse my -- I feel somewhat handicapped by not having the Q or the 10-K, but -- so -- but I assume that will be out before you report again in 5 or 6 weeks?
Yes.
Along with perhaps the proxy?
We're not sure of the timing of the proxy yet, but it will be -- the 10-K will be first and the proxy will be after that.
[Operator Instructions] And it seems there are no more further questions at the moment. So therefore, I will hand it back over to Ted Grauch. Actually, I'm sorry, we do have one more question. We have a question from [ Lloyd Sim ].
A question on the sublease. Where do we stand on that?
The sublease was executed, and it started in March and it's a 2-year deal. And so far, our tenant has been -- it's been successful.
Okay. Good. And just on the SBA loan, what was the total dollar amount? Was it $7 million?
$1.7 million, yes. It's a number just over $1.7 million, [ Lloyd ].
Okay. And I guess, looking -- so the initial tranche on this loan, it's on a 5-day look-back. So does that assume that we're somewhere in that $0.50 to $0.60 conversion rate, I guess?
Well, yes. We're in the process of compiling the data. So we just got to -- we want to make sure that we have the correct data before we talk about the exact pricing, but yes.
Okay. And I'm just looking here. So did any of the management team participate in the loan, or is it just Board members?
No, no, no, $1.7 million, $1.7 million.
$1.1 million?
It'd be 5 days prior to April 8, correct?
That is correct. That's right, yes.
Yes. They both did.
Yes -- go ahead, Ted.
I was just saying, both management and Board members, yes.
Okay. Because I'm just looking at the 8-K here, I didn't see anyone on the management side. I don't know if it's under a different entity. I assume it is. Perhaps we can talk offline about that.
Yes. It's -- there are different vehicles that were used to make the investment.
Okay. Great. The -- so total amount here, 12% per annum -- have you thought about doing a shareholders' rights offering?
No. We haven't.
How come?
We have -- we had to raise the money fairly quickly. A rights offering is a very expensive endeavor, and it requires mailing the shareholders and printing out the legal documents. Probably have to do an S-1/2, that's $0.25 million. That wasn't in -- that's not in the cards right now.
But you're going to be mailing out the proxy and the annual report anyway, so it could be contained as part of that, correct?
Yes. But an S-1 filing is a different story. There's all kinds of reps and warranties and legal work that goes in that. It's a minimum cost of $0.25 million to file an S-1, and that's what you'd have to do for a rights offering.
In terms of allowing your shareholders to participate, I guess, in the upside without getting the dilution, any suggestions there or anything that you'd be looking at?
Well, accredited investors, we have an investment banking firm that is handling this for us. And if there's an accredited investor that meets the criteria of participating in a Reg D offering, that investment banker can contact that individual or that institution.
Okay. Maybe you can supply that information?
I can, but I don't want to do it on this call.
No. I understand.
So you can call us afterwards if you meet that criteria.
And it looks like we have reached the end of the question-and-answer session. And I will now turn the call back over to Ted Grauch.
Great. Thank you for the questions. And so I'll kind of wrap up here. As we have in prior years, myself and the whole management team and the Board would really like to thank all the dedicated Blonder Tongue Labs' team members for their continued efforts and accomplishments, especially for continuing to work through these very difficult current COVID-related circumstances that have been impacting everyone in the company in different ways. It is the Blonder Tongue people that are responsible for our fantastic product reputation, our product, high reliability, great technology and overall value.
Thank you all for participating in the Blonder Tongue financial reporting teleconference today. We look forward to speaking with you at the next teleconference. Thank you.
And this concludes today's conference, and you may disconnect your lines at this time. Thank you for your participation.
Thanks very much.
Good afternoon, everyone, and welcome to the Brookline Bancorp, Inc. Q1 2020 Earnings Conference Call. [Operator Instructions] Please also note, today's event is being recorded. At this time, I'd like to turn the conference call over to Marissa Martin of Brookline Bancorp. Ma'am, please go ahead.
Thank you, Jamie, and good afternoon, everyone. Yesterday, we issued our earnings release and presentation, which is available on the Investor Relations page of our website, brooklinebancorp.com, and has been filed with the SEC. This afternoon's call will be hosted by Brookline Bancorp's executive team, Paul A. Perrault and Carl M. Carlson.
Before we begin, please note, this presentation is being done from several different locations. So if there's a delay or technical problem, we appreciate your patience and understanding.
This call may also contain forward-looking statements with respect to the financial condition, results of operations and business of Brookline Bancorp. Please refer to Page 2 of our earnings presentation for our forward-looking statement disclaimer. Also, please refer to our other filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, which contain risk factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from these forward-looking statements.
Any references made during this presentation to non-GAAP measures are only made to assist you in understanding Brookline Bancorp's results and performance trends and should not be relied on as financial measures of actual results or future predictions. For a comparison and reconciliation to GAAP earnings, please see our earnings release.
If you can join us on Page 3 of the earnings presentation, I'm pleased to introduce Brookline Bancorp's President and CEO, Paul Perrault.
Thanks, Marissa, and good afternoon, all. The quote, "may you live in interesting times", which some consider a blessing and some curse, often arises in times of crisis. And those of us who will have lived during some very interesting times know there's a beginning, a middle and an end. We certainly empathize with those who are suffering physically, emotionally or financially at this time. But we also challenge every day.
At our last earnings call on January 30, while the coronavirus pandemic was on all of our radar screens, we were not considering a near complete shutdown of the worldwide economy, unemployment claims surging into the millions on a weekly basis, interest rates going sharply to near 0 again and the need for trillions of dollars in fiscal and monetary economic assistance.
On February 1, Massachusetts confirmed its first case of coronavirus, a University of Massachusetts student who had just returned from Wuhan. Massachusetts was the second state in the nation to report a case. On March 1, Rhode Island confirmed its first 2 cases, which were related to a returning school trip to Italy in February. On March 9, Rhode Island Governor, Gina Raimondo, declared a state of emergency, and that was followed by Massachusetts Governor, Charlie Baker, on March 10.
As of today, both Massachusetts and Rhode island are operating in a stay-at-home environment, with only designated essential employees permitted to report to work. All nonessential retail businesses remain closed, and those that are allowed to open are doing so with restrictions in place.
I will touch on just a few areas and initiatives related to our preparation and response to this pandemic, and you can see that on Page 4 in the presentation. The most important thing is the health and safety of our employees and their families. We were able to shift to a work-from-home policy very early on due to our strong VPN and Zoom capabilities, which we were fortunate to have in place well in advance of the current environment. We remain as flexible as possible to accommodate those who have children at home or caring for a family member who may be ill.
At present, approximately 81% of the company's non-retail employees are working remotely and effectively. While traffic in the streets is quite low, you wouldn't know it from looking at the drive-up at the branches. We initiated a bank by appointment approach with minimal lobby access to further promote social distancing for both the bankers and the customers. We also staggered staffing schedules to minimize employee exposure while ensuring business continuity. All types of hand sanitizers and disinfectant wipes were distributed throughout the organization and enhanced cleaning went into place full time.
All customer-facing employees and those who are required to travel to company office have been provided with masks to minimize health risks to both employees and customers. We have had no furloughs and have actually been hiring for key positions, particularly in our call center and operations. Our bankers have never been busier in assisting new and existing businesses and retail customers with online banking and cash management services while also working to address any near-term cash flow concerns.
While much has changed over the last couple of months for the institution, much has remained the same. For our customers, we continue to reach out to ensure they know we are here for them. A company's culture is in the mission or a value statement. A company's culture is the sum of its actions and attitudes on a day in and day out basis of those who make up the organization in good times and bad. I am very proud of our company's culture, which is one of empathy for customers and colleagues in everything we do and what we also call our core 4 of accountability, teamwork, adaptability and leadership. They have truly been on display.
I will now turn you over to Carl, who will review the company's first quarter results.
Thank you, Paul. Our company entered this year and this crisis in a position of strength, record 2019 earnings, strong growth in commercial and consumer banking and a fortress balance sheet, defined by excellent asset quality, strong reserves and a robust capital base. In many ways, we are headed for a promising start to 2020, solid loan originations, supported by good deposit growth and fee income. We also successfully completed the merger and consolidation of First Ipswich Bank into Brookline Bank in mid-February. Soon after the weekend of our data conversion, our preparation and response to the global pandemic became our highest priority.
On Slide 6, we've provided summary income statements for the quarter, prior quarter and prior year. We recognized a net loss of $17.3 million for the quarter, which was driven by a provision for credit losses of $54.1 million. The significant increase in the provision was due to the potential deep and rapid decline in economic activity as our communities practice social distancing, schools and many businesses closed and nearly all events and activities were canceled. Also significant is our decision to continue forward and implement the new accounting standard commonly known as CECL, which shifted from estimating probable losses to estimating losses over the life of the loan using models based on future economic forecasts.
Our pretax pre-provision net revenue decreased $2.6 million from a very strong performance in Q4 and as net interest income declined and operating expenses increased, driven by higher professional fees, FDIC insurance and seasonality associated with compensation and benefits.
As illustrated on Page 7, net interest income declined $2.2 million as our net interest margin compressed 12 basis points. The yield on the loan portfolio declined 28 basis points as the pricing of over $1.8 billion in adjustable rate loans was significantly impacted by the sharp decline in prime and LIBOR rates. Linked- quarter declines in prepayment fees of $1.3 million and $153,000 in purchase accounting as well as an increase of $337,000 in amortization of deferred fees contributed 10 basis points in the decline in loan yields for the quarter. Overall, our cost of interest-bearing liabilities declined 13 basis points, which consisted of an 11 basis point decline in the cost of interest-bearing deposits and a 20 basis point decline in the cost of borrowings.
If you could follow me to Slide 8, you can reference our comparative but summary balance sheets. In the first quarter, we had solid loan growth of $85 million or 5% on an annualized basis, and deposits grew $60 million or 4% annualized. Also notable is the $52 million growth in the allowance for loan losses and related $16 million growth in the reserves for unfunded loans. We also added significantly to our cash and securities to prudently position ourselves to meet the potential financial needs of our clients. The loss in the quarter, as well as the modest stock repurchase activities, reduced our tangible book value per share by $0.31.
Slide 9 reflects the growth and composition of our significant loan and deposit categories. In the first quarter, we continued to have strong net loan growth in commercial real estate, while net deposit growth was driven by noninterest-bearing demand deposits and savings. Commercial real estate, which includes both investor and owner-occupied commercial real estate, makes up 55% of our loan portfolio. DDA represents 20% of our deposit base.
If you follow me to Slide 10, we have illustrated the near-term impact of the implementation of CECL in estimating the allowance for credit losses. At year-end, our total reserves for credit losses was $62.9 million, representing a reserve coverage of 78 basis points of total funded and unfunded loan commitments. There are 2 components: the allowance for loan losses, which was $61.1 million or 90 basis points of reserve coverage on loans outstanding; and a reserve of $1.9 million for unfunded credits. Accounting renewals were based on incurred or probable losses in the portfolio formulated on historical performance.
The new accounting standard, which was implemented on January 1, requires estimates for losses to be forward-looking over the life of the loan based on economic forecast. We chose to use Moody's ImpairmentStudio as well as Moody's economic forecasts to develop our estimates. We also chose to prudently calibrate the loan loss models to the performance of a peer group of Northeast banks since our historical loss data was considered too infrequent and too low. At year-end, we used the economic forecast as of December 14, 2019 and determined the total reserve for credit losses, also known as the allowance for credit losses or ACL, to be $78.5 million or 97 basis points of total funded and unfunded loans. This was an increase of $15.6 million or 25% from the prior accounting methodology.
At March 31, we decided to wait for the most updated Moody's economic forecast as of April 4, instead of using the mid-March version, which was less severe. The calculated ACL was $130.4 million, an increase of $51.9 million from our day 1 estimate. This increased our coverage on total commitments from 97 basis points to 161 basis points.
On Slide 11, we provide details on our reserve coverage on funded and total commitments by key segments and selected subset of our portfolio. The construction component of our commercial real estate portfolio experienced the highest change in coverage, rising from 148 to 513 basis points at March 31, requiring an additional allowance of $14.7 million in the quarter. We've also provided some of the key economic variables from the forecast driving our loss estimation models. It illustrates the significant expected deterioration from December to April in the economic forecast. Unemployment for the full year was expected to be 3.6% in the December 2019 forecast as compared to 6.3% in the April forecast, which had unemployment peaking at 8.7% in the second quarter before coming down to 6.5% at the end of the year. The commercial real estate price index also showed a significant 14.3% deterioration between the 2020 forecast.
On Slide 12, we have provided industry breakdowns for our major loan segments. Note, we have included owner-occupied commercial real estate and commercial loans and also reflect $64 million of commercial real estate loans within our equipment finance business. Investment commercial real estate of $3.2 billion comprises 47% of our outstanding loans. Apartments represent our largest segment. You can provide -- comprise 29% of our investment CRE portfolio, followed by office at 20% and retail at 17%.
Our commercial portfolio is $1.2 billion or 18% of our portfolio, and within commercial, food and lodging represents 15%, followed by manufacturing at 12%. Equipment finance at $1.1 billion represents 16% of our portfolio, which is led by a focus on laundry, tow truck and fitness equipment. Consumer loans of $1.2 billion is comprised of 1 point -- 1-4 family residential and home equity loans. Note, we have no direct exposure to airlines, auto lending, consumer credit cards, student loans or energy. We've also included some information in the appendix for the presentation -- of the presentation, providing various metrics and details about the portfolio, including loan to values and vintages, which illustrate the strong culture of credit underwriting, underlying our reputation for asset quality.
We've maintained the same portfolio segment on Slide 13 to provide insight into our loan payment deferment activity as well as illustrate our commitment to prudently respond to customer needs during this crisis. We have provided 90-day relief on loan payments on either principal or principal and interest. And these short-term modifications had no impact on our internal credit ratings related to these credits or accrual of interest or accounting for these assets at this time.
In total, loans with outstanding balances of $1 billion were granted a loan payment modification for approximately 15% of the portfolio as of April 17. The largest impacted categories were in our equipment finance units. We also provided deferred payment information by some selected segments we are tracking. As I mentioned earlier, apartments are our largest component of our investment commercial real estate portfolio. It is an area we pay close attention to. We have seen little need or requests for deferment. Another category we provide here is health care, also with few requests for deferments, where as an example, dentist offices are basically closed and only doing emergency procedures at this time. We certainly expect that activity to accelerate as offices will need to catch up on cleanings and other procedures.
As the stay-at-home restrictions are lifted, we also expect coffee and donuts to bounce back, folks to be focused on their health, laundries to be busier and, unfortunately, traffic accidents and breakdowns to resume. I want to highlight these are well-run businesses, and we're all in good standing before the economy basically shut down.
We have also been very active facilitating access to the SBA payroll protection program for our clients before the first round of funding closed on April 16, which we show on Slide 14. The company-funded its first PPP loan on Friday, April 3. And as of Friday the 24th, the company has originated 2,183 loans with balances of over $518 million. Portions of these loans will be eligible for forgiveness over the next several weeks, and we will also be tracking and reporting on the activity next quarter. We are very proud of the tremendous teamwork, adaptability, commitment and pure do-whatever-it-takes attitude we saw at every level and in every department across the organization. When the program reopened on Monday, as you would expect, we were back at it. However, the volume will be significantly less since we were very successful in helping our customers during the first round.
As shown on Slide 15, the company continues to be very well capitalized, exceeding all regulatory requirements as well as our own internal policies and operating targets. At March 31, we had capital buffer of 2.6% or $183 million over regulatory well-capitalized standards. During the first quarter, the Board expanded the previously announced stock buyback plan from $10 million to $20 million. The company announced on March 24 it was suspending any further purchases and, at that time, had completed the repurchase of 848,000 shares for $10.4 million.
Slide 16 provides a history of our regular dividend payout, which continued this quarter as the Board approved a quarterly dividend of $0.115 per share, which will be paid on May 29 to stockholders of record on May 15. Our dividend remains constant for the remainder of the year. Full year per share dividends would be $0.46, a 4.5% increase over 2019 and currently approximates a 4.4% yield.
This concludes my formal comments, and I'll turn it back to Paul.
Thanks, Carl. Joining us for the question-and-answer session today is Robert Rose, our Chief Credit Officer; and Michael McCurdy, our Chief Risk Officer and General Counsel. Brookline is very fortunate to have the expertise and experience of these gentlemen, particularly during this time, and I'm happy to say they represent the commitment and leadership I see across the organization. And now we will take questions.
[Operator Instructions] And our first question today comes from Mark Fitzgibbon from Piper Sandler.
I wondered if you could -- first off, you guys gave great detail on the slides. So thank you. It makes our life easier. I wondered if you could share with us maybe the areas or segments of the portfolio where you're most concerned where you feel as though the borrowers are most distressed and/or areas where you think the potential loss content would be greatest.
Bob?
It's hard to pinpoint extremely precisely. But when you think of the things that will return to health relatively quickly and things that won't, in our equipment finance segment, I would be a bit concerned about a portion of our exercise studios. Planet Fitness and other low-priced components such as YMCAs and JCCs are about 50% of that, and they tend to not have fallout in difficult times. It's the middle- priced and the higher-priced ones that seem to have that fallout. So I would say, a segment of the fitness portfolio would concern us a little bit.
Our hotel exposure, while modest in size at about $126 million, is about 58% vacation-oriented, recreation-oriented. It is all in New England, places where you can get to in a car or a ferry. And we have -- those customers have observed some cancellations of summer plans, but we are hopeful that they will benefit from people canceling airfare fly to type vacations, where people want to be closer to home and be able to get home quickly. The other part of that portfolio would be business hotels, but they are all in this area. There aren't that many of them. So those would be 2 that stand out.
Okay. Great. And then -- and I know this is very difficult to answer. There's a lot of moving parts and such.
But how are you thinking about the provision, say, in the second quarter? And any guidance you could provide would be super helpful.
Well, I'm not a fortune teller and I'm not a health care expert, but we are paying close attention to how our customers are doing. We are talking with them all the time. We're especially talking with them in the key segments that were highlighted on Page 13. We've also instituted a program of trying to project forward 90 and 180 days out as to what the customers are thinking. So I really cannot say. I do believe that this level of provisioning that we've hit because we took a very late forecast, the latest one we could find, I think this gain in altitude that we've achieved will be helpful in coming quarters.
I would add a little something to that, Mark, which is that CECL is new for everybody. It's new for us. And we took Moody's models as they came through the door, and we did not try to match it up with our actual experience in our portfolio and say we've got these exposures here, which Moody's is treating is harshly, but it appears ours have been in very, very good shape. We certainly took it as they came with that harsh outcome.
Okay. And then, Paul, based on what you know today, do you feel like you have enough capital to sort of ride out the storm?
Yes.
Tax rate.
Okay. And then, lastly, Carl, just 2 things on modeling. I'd be curious as to your thoughts about the outlook for the margin and the effective tax rate.
Sure. Regarding the margin, we've got a lot of internal models that we've been running. There's just so much uncertainty and so much variability here. I'm not going with -- out with any external guidance on the margin at this time.
As you can see, we've grown the balance sheet quite a bit with cash and securities. We're also putting on quite a bit in loans and offsetting that with a lot of deposits as well. So we'll -- you can kind of try to work up your own numbers in that, but there's a lot of variability, and I'm not really comfortable trying to give you an estimate on what the margin is going to be.
Tax rate, tax rate is going to be right around 25%. We did have a discrete item that was a benefit this quarter of about $750,000 associated with the CARES Act. So we were able to recognize that, which had an impact on taxes this quarter.
Our next question comes from Laurie Hunsicker from Compass Point.
Just wanted to echo Mark's comments. This deck is amazing. I really appreciate your transparency. It's really helpful. Just one quick question here. Just kind of looking back and forth between Slide 12 and Slide 13, I just want to make sure I've got this right. So Dunkin' Donuts exposure of $165 million, is that primarily C&I?
Yes. Yes, it is.
Okay. And so that's what's found, I guess, embedded in that $180 million on Page 12. Is that correct?
Correct. Correct. Food and lodging is dominated by Dunkin'. And I will say, to the extent that there's some real estate, Laurie, sometimes Dunkin' operators, the better ones, like to buy little strips for themselves, but the part of that, that they operate would be included in there. But restaurant exposure outside of Dunkin' is rather small.
Laurie, thank you for the comments on the slide deck, but you did catch something on Slide 13, that 78% exposure. It's really more like 90%. It represents 90% of our restaurant or food exposure.
[Operator Instructions] Our next question comes from Collyn Gilbert from KBW.
Just starting on the reserves. You guys took a really big reserve build, and it obviously sounds like you took a very conservative stance, which is great. But just wanting to dig into that a little bit more. I guess the one part that I found interesting was just the assumption within the CRE, assuming the reserve build on that book, what kind of was the thought there? And I understand -- and maybe it was as simple as just using Moody's forecast. But I don't know, I just -- I was surprised by the reserve build, specifically within the CRE book. If you could just give a little bit more color to the thoughts there.
Actually, I may have been more surprised than you. I'll let Bob answer it. It's really as simple as you described. But Bob, do you want to give a little color there?
As you know, it did surprise us as well. And if you noticed, it's a little punitive on commercial -- on construction, and that surprised us. I think that they are assuming that when you finish something and offer it up to be used, that no one will come and you'll have to take some form of loss.
There's nothing particularly odd or difficult in that portfolio. In fact, there's about $70 million of it is build- to-suit that's going to be used by people when it's completed. So that part, I don't think makes a lot of sense. As to the other parts of our real estate portfolio, when you go through them, they appear to be behaving fairly well in rent collection activity, the part that might be student, the part that might be workforce-related, the part that might be a and b, the range of collections are close to 100% down to as low as 75% in that workforce range.
So we're pleased with the way things are holding up. The retail segment or the slightly mixed use segment, mixed use is usually retail and other things, beginning to see some request there, but we don't think there's anything particularly not good about our real estate assets, Collyn.
It is our legacy business, and we do have a lot of expertise in real estate around here.
Yes. Okay. Okay. Good. And then any chance you guys have what the number would have been, the reserves differential between adopting the April Moody's baseline versus had you adopted the March? Most of your peers adopted March. So as you said, you may be one step ahead of everybody. I'm just curious if you can quantify what that difference would be.
It was virtually the same. As to the January -- the 1/1 number that's the middle bar in Carl's slide, we were surprised that it hadn't moved much at all, Collyn.
Okay. Okay. And then I guess just to round out the comments. I mean, it's interesting. So your stock is down a fair bit today, but yet, it seems as if, if I take a step back, that a lot of these disclosures are just -- are really erring on the side of you guys being ultra, ultra conservative. Even with your -- as you kind of segment where you have industry exposure, that's not necessarily where you're seeing trouble.
I think that's right, Collyn. And when you think about a great fourth quarter, a pretty robust first quarter, put the provisioning aside for a second, a little bit of a margin squeeze, which is identifiable and manageable as we go forward, everything is in place to repeat our past performance, except for the pandemic and the new kind of provisioning policies, the CECL, if you will. That's what's different.
Okay. One last question before I get to a NIM question is the -- I'm just looking -- sorry, I'm just looking through this now. But I guess perhaps the one area of concern is to how higher education is going to look as we move into the fall. I mean you guys are on the hot bed. Obviously, you have a lot of academic institutions. Do you have a sense of what exposure you have to that segment? I know you mentioned it on that -- you're still seeing rents being paid on that part, Bob. But just other exposures you might have to kind of academia, student housing and all of that?
Yes. Yes. Look, I'm going to give you a couple of numbers here, but I'm going to tell you that this is a dragnet. We have looked at the ZIP codes for in and around the colleges in Providence, Boston,
Cambridge, and Tufts over in Somerville. So it is a pure dragnet of exposure. And that dragnet of exposure would pick up about $220 million worth of apartments in those ZIPs and about $100 million of so-called mixed use CRE, which would have a retail component to it.
So you might call that 300 and what, $320 million roughly. But I will tell you that, that is a pure dragnet and mixed in with students who go to Harvard Square, and there are lots of people who live over in Cambridge that have nothing to do with education. So it is not correct to think of that as pure 1:1 exposure, but that is sort of the nexus of things that we will watch closely as the year unfolds.
Okay. Great. And then just lastly, Carl, I understand you're not really desiring to give any kind of NIM guidance, but on the funding side, which seems like one segment that you do have a little bit more control over, how do you see that trending? I mean, you guys are still sitting with CDs, I guess, at like 2 22. It just seems like there'd be a lot of room still to move on the deposit side.
Well, that's true, and we'll see that benefit going forward. Certainly, we have a lot of things that are maturing but -- and we'll be repricing down.
Okay. Can you tell us where your -- either where your CD rates were at the end of March or where you're putting on new CDs today, 1-year CDs?
Chief Financial Officer 1-year CDs, I think we may be in about 70 basis points, in that range, and maybe even lower at this point. We got with a little bit of specials here and there with the -- we're not even -- we're seeing the appetite for CDs disappear. Folks are more or less getting more and more liquid as we look at deposits.
Just to give you a little sense on that, we look at our deposit accounts, individual deposit accounts, and break it up into deciles. And we're seeing basically every category grow significantly since February. And that's really, I think, you're getting a lot of the government stimulus money that's coming in as well as people just being very conservative and saving more and holding more liquidity. And we're seeing people move out of CDs and basically put it in the money market or savings.
[Operator Instructions] And ladies and gentlemen, at this time, showing no additional questions, I'd like to turn the conference call back over to Paul Perrault for any closing remarks.
Thanks, Jamie, and thank you all for joining us today, and we look forward to talking with you next quarter.
Ladies and gentlemen, that does conclude today's presentation. We do thank you for joining. You may now disconnect your lines.
Good afternoon, and welcome to the Data I/O Corporation First Quarter 2020 Financial Results Conference Call. [Operator Instructions]
Please note, this event being recorded.
I would now like to turn the conference over to Jordan Darrow. Please go ahead.
Thank you, Grant, and welcome, everyone, to the Data I/O Corporation First Quarter 2020 Financial Results Conference Call.
With me today are Anthony Ambrose, President and CEO of Data I/O Corporation; and Joel Hatlen, Chief Operating Officer and Chief Financial Officer of Data I/O.
Before we begin, I'd like to remind you that statements made in this conference call concerning COVID-19, future revenues, results from operations, financial position, markets, economic conditions, estimated impact of tax reform, product releases, new industry partnerships and any other statements that may be construed as a prediction of future performance or events are forward-looking statements, which involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors, which may cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed or implied by such statements.
These factors include uncertainties as to the impact from the COVID-19 pandemic, along with expected reopening and recovery efforts within the supply chain and among our customer base.
Levels of orders, ability to report revenues based upon the timing of product deliveries and installations, market acceptance of new products, changes in economic conditions and market demand, pricing and other activities by competitors, and other risks, including those described from time-to-time in the company's filings on Form 10-K and 10-Q with the Securities and Exchange Commission, press releases and other communications.
The accuracy and completeness of forward-looking statements should not be unduly relied upon. Data I/O is under no duty to update any of these forward-looking statements.
Beyond today's conference call, our next interaction with shareholders will be at our Annual Meeting to be held on May 18 at 10:00 a.m. Pacific time at our corporate headquarters in Redmond, Washington. In this event, since our proxy agent was unable to handle mailing of documents to certain shareholders due to COVID-19 challenges, we have made our information available via Internet delivery as needed. We have provided ample time for all shareholders to cast their votes, and we hope you do. Shareholders may not come to our offices, but instead may avoid social gathering risk by listening to our annual meeting via conference call. Participation details are available on our website in the Investor Relations section.
Now I would like to turn over the call to Anthony Ambrose, President and CEO of Data I/O.
Thank you very much, Jordan. I'd like to comment on 2020 Q1, and our recent developments, and I'll turn it over to Joel Hatlen for more detail on specific numbers.
I'll start by first addressing the COVID-19 situation. For Data I/O, the coronavirus pandemic has impacted our customers, suppliers and our facilities. We've developed plans for each of these, while focusing on our 3 priorities: number one is keeping our people and their families safe; number two is keeping our facilities safe and secure; and three is serving our customers.
As an essential supplier to the medical and aerospace industries, Data I/O remained open for business. We've been vigilant in keeping our employees and our facilities safe. We required most of our workforce to operate remotely, while maintaining a core, on-site group to staff our manufacturing, service and support operations. Our global teams follow recommended best practices in accordance with, and often in advance of, local government mandates. Local health authorities are reporting steady progress in each of our operating locations. And I'd like to take this time to recognize the efforts of our entire global workforce who've risen to the occasion and kept our workplaces, their communities and families safe while continuing to support our customers. We believe our business and operational strategies have proven helpful as we manage the effects of COVID-19. We remain globally diversified, which provides competitive advantages, as well as an inherent hedge to location risk.
This diversification spans manufacturing for a multi-source supply chain, engineering as well as in our customer base, vertical markets and customer support. From a financial perspective, we entered the crisis in a position of strength. Data I/O is the largest company in our industry and we have the strongest balance sheet. We are debt-free.
At the end of the first quarter, we had $13.8 million in cash or about $1.68 per share of cash. We believe we're better prepared than anyone else in our industry to ride out whatever may come forward and are taking proactive steps to keep it that way. Beginning Q1 and early in the second quarter, we implemented cash conservation and expense management initiatives, including reductions and deferrals in executive and Board level compensation. We also reduced work weeks for certain locations and functions. We'll continue to evaluate on a case-by-case basis, all government programs worldwide that help us preserve our workforce and cash flow at the same time.
At this time, however, we do not plan to accept funding from SBA PPP program in the United States. Meanwhile, we remain committed to our long-term business objectives. Unlike other industries, we believe the long-term electronics industry will recover and require a secure, high-quality device programming as it recovers. Data I/O has consistently been at the forefront of the industry. First quarter was no different, as we continue to invest in our leading data programming and security provisioning platforms. Our innovations and ultrafast performance and reliability were recognized in the quarter. In addition, we're honored to have received the coveted Service Excellence Award for device program support for the second consecutive year. Our engineering innovations and comprehensive customer support seem to be resonating with customers around the world.
During the first quarter, our global sales channels and world-class products enable us to win systems orders at new automotive customer locations in Asia, North America and Europe as well as being selected by a global ventilator electronics manufacturer to ramp their production of very important ventilators to fight COVID-19. We're very proud to be supporting the medical manufacturers and their EMS partners and announced the target program to provide our fastest support to customers building COVID-19-related products. Economic times and markets may change, but the reasons we are selected by customers remain the same: Outstand products, great customer support, financial stability and global capability. Overall worldwide, the automotive electronics market from which we've generated about half of our revenue for the past several years, has been materially impacted by plant closures.
We've seen China factories reopening, although the U.S., Mexico and Europe remain shutdown. Guidance from leading customers indicate Europe and America locations will be reopening soon and ramping output later in the second quarter with the expectation of normal production by the fourth quarter of this year. Within automotive electronics, we continue to believe that the sector tracks a substantial multiyear increase in content per vehicle, and complexity and design and programming requirements, including the transition from eMMC to UFS flash storage.
You'll recall that UFS is the next-generation flash memory using the latest automotive designs to support their projected growth and programmable content and performance. While we're still in a very fluid situation, with short-term sales funnel, puts and takes, our conviction remains that the industry will need to reinvest. When that happens, whether or not we're the last one standing, Data I/O will be in a position to gain market share with the most robust programming innovations. For our other key target markets and Internet of Things, the rapid adoption of work-at-home policies amid COVID-19 underscores the importance of security at all ends of the connected electronics ecosystem. You seen reports of hacking incidents are way up, not just with home workers, but with the associated IoT devices as well.
Our SentriX platform, a highly robust and flexible cost-effective security provisioning and data programming deployment system for authentication devices, secure elements and secure microcontrollers, has experienced steady interest despite the recent stress on the overall economy. The low capital investment -- SentriX model is becoming even more attractive to companies to require solutions on tight budgets. Our marketing mix is shifting as well in response to COVID-19. While some of our key conferences have been canceled, we'll continue to look for ways to expand our market and other venues and through other channels besides trade shows with enhancements in our digital marketing platform. Our strategy for SentriX is to continue to expand its presence and simplify and scale the overall platform in 2020. Our strong cash position maintained by rapid actions, combined with our long-term view of the markets, gives us the financial flexibility and a launching path for growth as conditions improve. In these uncertain times, it's our intent to remain agile, improve our processes, follow our product road maps, protect our superior financial condition and grow relative to the competition.
With that, I'll turn it over to Joel Hatlen, our Chief Operating Officer and Chief Financial Officer, provide more details on the quarter. Joel?
Thank you, Anthony. Good day to everyone. Net sales in the first quarter of 2020 were $4.8 million as compared with $6.1 million in the prior year's period, and $5.9 million in the fourth quarter of 2019. First quarter 2020 bookings were $4.3 million as compared with $6.2 million in the first quarter of 2019, and $6.9 million in the fourth quarter of 2019.
On a geographic basis, international sales represented approximately 94.3% of total net sales for the first quarter of 2020 compared with 94.1% in the 2019 period. Total capital equipment sales were 54% of revenues, and adapters and service revenues were 28% and 18%, respectively, of revenues in the first quarter of 2020 compared with 61%, 24% and 15%, respectively, of revenues for the first quarter of 2019. Gross margin as a percentage of sales in the first quarter of 2020 was 58.2% as compared to 60.8% in the first quarter of 2019. For the first quarter of 2020, gross margin was primarily impacted by fixed costs being spread over lower revenues, and a 2.7% reduction that relates to tariffs on U.S. and China trade.
The revenue mix shift to increased percentages of adapters and recurring revenue sales as a percentage of total revenues benefited gross margins as these generally have higher margins as compared to equipment sales. Operating expenses were down, both compared to the prior year and the prior quarter periods. The year-over-year change is primarily related to variable expenses, including substantially lower incentive compensation accruals and sales commissions as well as stock-based compensation.
Cost control measures also significantly contributed to the reduction. With most other expense categories lower than in prior periods. Although R&D spending of $1.6 million was down compared with the prior year period, it came in consistent with the fourth quarter spending as we continue to invest in leading the industry and providing improved solutions for our customers.
In accordance with GAAP, net loss in the first quarter 2020 was a loss of $554,000 or $0.07 per share compared with net income of $26,000 or 0 per diluted share in the first quarter of 2019.
Backlog at March 31, 2020, was $2.3 million as compared with $2.9 million at the end of the year, and up from $2 million at March 31 of 2019.
Data I/O had $1.5 million in deferred revenue at the end of the first quarter, consistent with the end of the fourth quarter of 2019.
Data I/O's financial condition remains strong with cash of $13.8 million at March 31, 2020, approximately $100,000 less than at the beginning of the year. Our days sales outstanding, or DSO, a receivables collection measure at March 31 were below our 68 target range with the receivables reduced by $1 million from good collection efforts from the end of the fourth quarter.
Payables were reduced to $3.6 million at the end of the quarter compared to $4.1 million at the end of the prior year. Net working capital at the end of the first quarter was $18.4 million, down slightly from $18.5 million at 12/31 of 2019. This benefited from the Cares Act acceleration of our alternative minimum tax refund from tax reform back in 2017. Finally, we had shares outstanding of 8,221,000 at March 31, 2020, as compared with $8,288,000 at March 31, 2019, with the difference primarily related to the share buyback that we completed during the third quarter of 2019. That concludes my remarks. I'll turn the call back to the operator to begin the question-and-answer segment. Operator, will you please start the Q&A process?
[Operator Instructions] Our first question will come from Jaeson Schmidt with Lake Street.
Just curious if you could comment what you're seeing from an order pattern standpoint in the month of April compared to the end of March?
So Jaeson, that's a good question. I won't get too quantitative. I'll just say this. We're not seeing the end of the world out there, okay? People are still buying things. CapEx was down in Q1. When we put our internal numbers and forecast together for Q2, we assume CapEx would be impacted as well. But it's not the end of the world. We've definitely seen an impact, but it's not like we've fallen off a cliff or anything.
Okay. That's helpful. And then as a follow-up, I know in the script, you mentioned an order for an electronics manufacturer in the ventilator market. Just curious if this is more of a one-off win? Or if you've seen sort of sustained inbound interest from the health care medical market as a whole?
Well, we we haven't talked too much about in the past. We actually have a pretty good medical business. We haven't broken it out. It's been considered part of our industrial business up till now, which is run between, I don't know, Joel, 20% and 25% of our overall business for several years in that range.
Yes. It fluctuates, 15% to 25%.
Yes. And then probably more in the programming centers as well. But we called out the specific win because, number one, we put together a program for medical customers to make sure that they could quickly repurpose equipment to support new medical needs. That's actually one of the big advantages of the Data I/O technology is, with our pre programming, you can convert from a part that might be supporting a ventilation system in a car, and in 30 minutes, you can be reprogramming now to support a ventilator for a hospital. We can convert the line that quickly. And so a customer came to us, they had a problem. They'd actually prototyped on a alternative programming solution and found that the performance was terrible. They came to us with LumenX, and we were able to get them about an 8x performance game. And they move very rapidly to place an order with us and get that to support their ramp. And the end customer, we don't have the permission to use their name. But if you Google big government orders of ventilators, you can figure out 1 of the 2 companies.
Our next question will come from Pete James with LJ Capital.
Can you discuss the margin profile by revenue type for capital equipment sales, adapters, maintenance and software upgrades and per click fees for SentriX programming, please?
Yes. I won't go into too much detail. But in general, the software obviously carries higher margins. Services tend to carry pretty good margins as well. The capital equipment, it really depends on not only the type of system ordered, but the channel. And I'll give you an example. So if we sell-through a direct sales channel, we'll tend to have a higher gross margin and also a higher sales expense because we'll pay commissions. If we sell-through a distributor, we'll have a lower gross margin on that equipment because we provide the equipment at a discount to the distributor. At the same time, our sales commissions will be much lower because the commission has been taken in the form of a product discount. So it's fairly variable. But within those broad parameters, that's the pattern of our business.
Okay. I had one other question as well. You've mentioned the transition from eMMC to UFS, can you talk more about what this means in the automotive electronics sector with near and longer-term perspectives? And where your technology stand relative to what else is available in the market from your competitors?
Sure. So as you know, the semiconductor industry from time-to-time adopts certain standards for widely used components such as flash memory. eMMC was that broadly deployed standard in the PC industry, the mobile phone industry, automotive electronics for the better part of a decade. Starting in mobile phones, probably 3 or 4 years ago, there was a transition to a new form of memory interface, called UFS. Without drilling down too far, it provides a much higher read capability, a much better nonsequential read capability, meaning if you switch around from application-to-application, you get the data faster. And it also is able to operate at lower power. That was very attractive for the mobile phone industry, and they adopted it first. And as the industry, in general, move towards UFS, the cost patterns and reliability characteristics were consistent with what was required for the automotive industry. And they've been moving a lot of the high-density flash memory applications such as infotainment, in Dash computing, displays, things like that, to UFS. That's actually very good for Data I/O because we're one of the handful of suppliers that can actually program us in the market. eMMC, pretty much anybody could do it. We did it better, of course, because it's much faster. But right now, we're 1 of 2 or 3 suppliers that have announced the capability to support UFS. And when we're able to sit down with customers, we can explain why our approach has some very important technical benefits that maybe some others don't. So the move to UFS, we view generally is very favorable to Data I/O because we have a unique technology position. And also, very cost-effective for the customer.
Our next question will come from George Melas with MKH Management.
Anthony, you mentioned in the press release and also in your remarks that you had won 3 -- you have 3 new automotive wins in Asia, America and Europe. That seems pretty impressive. Can you talk a little bit about that? I don't know how much detail you can provide, but how big those are? And I imagine these are competitive wins.
Exactly, George. And I called it out specifically for that. What was otherwise a pretty dismal quarter for capital purchases. People just were not adding capacity. There's still nonetheless, new applications. We talked about infotainment. We've talked about advanced driver assist. One of them was also in the area of electrification, okay? Which is a nice win for us. We hope it's the start of something very nice long term. We'll see how it plays out. But we've instructed our sales team to continually to go after not only the customers they know, but to pursue the new applications. And the good news is in automotive, there are a lot of new applications, and we have a very good reputation in that industry.
Okay. Can you explain a little bit what electrification means? What kind of application is that?
So battery-powered cars.
Okay. And is that some of your first win in that space or not?
No, it's not the first one, George. But you would recognize the customer's name.
Okay. Great. Great. That's great news. Well done. It's amazing to get new customers in this environment. Quick question about services and maintenance sales, that has held up quite well. Can you help us -- you sort of remind us kind of what that is? And how is that holding up as well?
Well, that includes things that are not capital equipment purchases and not adapter sales. So for example, we offer software contracts. We have customers pay us NRE to do development of algorithms and other things like that. We have maintenance agreements and things like that. And of course, SentriX falls in there as well. Okay? And it tends to be a little more stable because we'll tend to get an order for an annual contract, and we'll make up -- if it there was $12,000 for a contract, we take a PO for $12,000 and then amortize it $1,000 a month. So it tends to be fairly stable.
Okay. Great. Great. And then just on SentriX. Can you sort of point if there is any sort of meaningful progress in the quarter or some relationships that are deepening? And how do you expect centric to play out in 2020?
Well, the interesting thing about SentriX is, you'd be hard-pressed to -- if you looked at our inbound activity to understand there was any COVID-19 effect going on at all. We unfortunately lost a couple of our marketing venues that we were planning on in Q1 and also in Q2 and Q3. A trade show is not likely to be a good thing from a marketing perspective, maybe for the rest of the year, certainly through probably September. So we're looking at other ways to promote it. The -- we've had good progress working with semiconductor suppliers, good progress on the underlying technology, good progress on new device supports and good progress on end customers and channel partners coming in with new opportunities.
[Operator Instructions] Our next question will come from Mark Spiegel with Stanphyl Capital.
Well, as you -- you may remember, we're value guys. And so we sold basically the stock on the way up, but we're in pretty good now. So here's my question, and it's a general question. How much of your business is dependent on the volume of the end product. And in other words, let's just say hypothetically that they were using your machine to program the new Mercedes S Class. And because automotive sales are going to be terrible this year, they sell, I don't know, 80,000 of them instead of 100,000, does that affect you guys? Or do you basically just sell them the tool and after that, it's -- it doesn't really matter how many of them they sell?
Well, we're somewhat insulated on volume, but we're not immune to volume effects. So automotive sales being potentially down would definitely have an impact on the people that buy for capacity. Okay? And -- but as we mentioned earlier, we had 3 new wins, primarily where there was new technology involved. So for example, if you're making a major model changeover and you're adding a lot of new features, they have to put in place the capability to produce the car, whether they produce as many as the guys forecast 6 months ago or not. Now what we are seeing is customers that may be buying to a certain volume level or thought they were and they were cutting back their forecast. They're still going to buy, but maybe they don't buy as much. Maybe they try and squeeze out 2 machines instead of adding a third, that type of thing. So we're not immune. But in general, it's volume. But also remember, it's the amount of bits programmed so if the feature set doubles the amount of software code, then we've got to program twice as many bits, which means programming demand goes up. And then finally, the type of bits really matter. Security obviously carries quite a premium over standard programming. So yes, it will have an impact. No, it's not 100% deterministic and there are other factors involved.
How many machines do you typically sell for a given model? I mean is it like 1 machine can handle 100,000 cars and -- or 50 or 30? I just -- I don't have a grasp of that, really.
Yes. It really depends on the application. For example, if you're talking to infotainment, you might need a couple of machines to support infotainment. And remember, we're working with the electronics models from one end customer or many models from different end customers. So it's hard to draw a one- to-one correlation that I think you're looking for. I just can't give that to you.
Well, is your typical -- last question, is your typical order multiple machines to the same customer for the same application? So they might need five. And in this case, they only buy four. I mean is it something like that? It's not just 1 machine per application?
I think the typical order is probably -- depending on how you define applications, probably 1 or 2 per applications. But over time, the factories end up with multiple versions of our equipment, because they're dealing with mutiple model years, multiple applications, et cetera. Of course, [Indiscernible] goes back and forth.
Well, that they couldn't avoid that. So if there's a new model year, are they forced to buy a new machine, or -- I'm trying to -- I guess, it goes back to my original question. I'm wondering, and I know you said it's not one-for-one, but let's say the auto market is down now 25% this year, what would that typically -- well, I understand things get more complicated and you do more programming. I mean off the top of your head, what does that do to your automotive business? Is it down 5%, 10%? Is it flat because there's more programming going on? I mean I'm just trying to get a grasp of that.
Yes. That kind of number wouldn't be good. I'll just put it that way. I would probably have a disproportionate impact in the capital equipment. We'd still sell adapters. We'd still sell services, things like that. But the -- it's not a one-for-one correlation. And I don't know that I can give you a whole lot more detail authoritatively right now.
Okay. Last question, I know I said the other one was. You said things are not falling off a cliff, but they're being affected. The quarter you just reported is sort of off a cliff a small -- if anyway, relative to the year ago quarter. Do you see this, let's call it, low level of activity continuing? Or is it worse than this?
Well, I think from an automotive perspective, I think the electronics industry bottomed out, probably, April was the bottom, just in terms of their overall impact. They're telling us they're going to be reopening. We've been getting supplier letters, giving us some guidance on what their ramps are so the auto factories appear to be reopening in Europe and the United States. I understand middle of next month. So that's a good sign. And generally, they closed probably the third week of March. So that would be a 2-month hiatus. So we're going to have to work through that. And they're not going to come back to 100% right away. So the range of forecast that we're looking at is extremely wide. And that's why we've taken steps to be ready, save our cash. But at the same time, if it turns around quickly, we want to be ready.
Well, okay. So again, I'll try to pin you down a little and you can try to unpin yourself.
Our next question will come from Mike Donovan, Private Investor.
Anthony and Joel, I trust you and your families or safe. I'm a longtime shareholder. My question is around, I think, a SentriX, specifically. And it has felt like over time or at least at the outset, that the sort of the picture around SentriX was one of a machine centric some reconfiguring going on, some relationships developed with the semiconductor companies in terms of provisioning, and then a little -- a different business model, not a little bit of a different business model, a very different business model in terms of pricing per unit versus the CapEx. In some of the recent documents I've read, I read this term security deployment as a service. I also follow some of the headcount and the personnel, the advertisements you have for skill sets that you're looking to hire. And I guess by trying to jump to the end, my sense is you've learned a lot about the needs for security in the marketplace and your strategy and your execution approach is shifting. Would that be a correct assessment on my part? And if so, what can you share about what you're seeing in terms of what customers actually need beyond the equipment?
Well, I think you raised some good points there. And remember, as we learn our positioning the market gets refined, we have a very strong Head of Marketing and Business development, Michael Tidwell, who brings more of a software frame of mind to the table. And so he's been able to adjust our product positioning accordingly. To get to the basics, what we talked about last quarter was the need to have, what we call simplify and scale. The premise that people need security, I think, is being more and more understood at a slow pace, okay, admittedly, but people are getting with the program on security. The big challenge is how do they want to do it? And what can they afford? And what's the type of customer profile that we can best support. And what we've discovered is customers want the whole security process end-to-end to be simplified. We don't control that entire process. We work with a number of partners and with the whole goal of being to simplify it. And I'd be happy to walk you through the 100 or so parameters you could decide to change on a fully configured secure element, and it would take us a month to figure out what you wanted to do on that. Or you could simply say, I want to onboard this device to the cloud when it turns on, or I want to authenticate it when it turns on and make sure that I can manage software updates in a secure manner. And so what we're trying to do is explain to customers as well, if that's what you want, then picked this pre-configured option over here or we've got a use case for you or a profile that might make more sense. And so we've begun the process of educating customers on -- and hopefully speaking their language is a little bit better than we have in the past. And that's really what I think you're seeing on SentriX.
And SentriX falls underneath this 18% of revenues when you look at a portfolio split between CapEx and adapters and software.
Our next question will come from Avi Fisher with Long Cast Advisers.
I'm sorry to mention this, how many SentriX units are deployed?
Okay. 5. And are you offering any onetime discounts or financing options?
No. It's an interesting point. We're really trying to be frugal with our cash right now. If I thought we're going to go jump in and out of a v-shaped or section or something, I might get more aggressive on something like that. We're going to choose to keep our powder dry at least for a little while.
Awesome. And one last question. This is our third straight quarter of growing consumables revenue. And I'm just trying to understand what takeaway to read from that. It seems like I know SentriX is in that line
That's correct.
We still have 5 deployed, Avi.
Avram Fisher item, but I'm not sure that's material yet. I know it reflects capacity utilization by some of your customers. Is there anything you can offer to help understand this sort of positive trend?
Yes. It's a positive trend. But I would caution you not to draw too much or infer too much. We're in crazy times right now. And as I've indicated before, the numbers in any 1 quarter can bounce around. It's clearly a trend we want. We want the recurring revenue to go up. That's part of the business strategy behind SentriX. And obviously, SentriX is contributing to that. But the -- what I'm saying is don't read too much too fast.
Is it growing because of SentriX? Or is it probably just because your customers are using programming a little bit more and using more of your product?
I think it's growing because as a percentage, remember, the CapEx has gone down as well.
The other thing that clouds that a little bit was we had a very rough Q3 in terms of our business levels. And you saw that, that's been recovering since then.
Correct. So that's a growing use of -- but that's a growth -- does that mean your customers have worked off the excess inventory they had?
I think it -- what I'm saying, Avi, is don't draw too many conclusions over the last 3 quarters.
Fair enough. And yes, it's coming off of a very low base as well, which I'm aware of. But I appreciate the color.
At this time, I'm showing no more questions in the question queue. This will conclude our question- and-answer session. I would like to hand the conference back over to Anthony Ambrose for any closing remarks.
May 18.
Thank you very much, Grant. As there are no further questions, I'd like to close the call by thanking everyone for their participation today. I'd also like to remind everyone to vote electronically in the upcoming shareholder meeting May 18, Joel?
May 18. And I hope everyone remains safe and productive. Thank you very much.
The conference has now concluded. Thank you for attending today's presentation. You may now disconnect.
This conference call may contain forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. The words believe, expect, anticipate, intend, estimate, may, should, could, will, plan, future, continue and other expressions that are predictions of or indicate future events and trends and that do not relate to historical matters, identify forward-looking statements.
These forward-looking statements are based largely on our expectations or forecast of future events can be affected by inaccurate assumptions and are subject to various business risks and known and unknown uncertainties, a number of which are beyond our control. Therefore, actual results could differ materially from the forward-looking statements contained in this document, and readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on such forward-looking statements.
Digital Ally will undertake no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. A wide variety of factors could cause or contribute to such differences and could adversely impact revenues, profitability, cash flows and capital needs. There can be no assurance that the forward-looking statements contained in this document will, in fact, transpire or prove to be accurate.
Now I'd like to turn the call over to Stan Ross.
Thanks, everybody, for joining us today. I've got with me Tom Heckman, the company's CFO. Tom will do a quick recap of last year's numbers and fourth quarter numbers. And we will probably move rather quickly on into visiting about what we still believe 2020 looks like in regards to our existing products and also touch on our most recent press release that we announced today concerning the disinfectant that we will now be marketing to our first responders as well.
So Tom, I'll let you do a little quick recap, and then we'll get into the forward-looking stuff.
All right. Thank you, Stan, and welcome, everyone. I appreciate you joining us today. I do want to let you know that we have filed our Form 10-K with the SEC this morning. And it is a full recap of the year 2019 versus 2018, and I certainly refer you to that. I'm not going to go through that in any significant detail.
I'll try and hit some of the high points. And I know with the current environment and everything that's going on, 2019 seems like ancient history with what we're dealing with right now. So I won't spend a lot of time with it. We'll talk about what's happened recently, including in the first quarter here and where we sit today.
So anyway, with that in mind, I would tell you that 2019, on a bottom line, about $5 million better than the previous year. And that was primarily due to the patent litigation settlement that we entered into with WatchGuard, where gained $6 million in funding through that. Offset by a $3.3 million increase in our patent litigation liability, the fair value of that. So in essence, that contributed about $3 million, a little less than $3 million to our bottom line. So we had good improvement elsewhere.
If you look at the top line, really, I think it's more indicative of 2 factors. Number one, we're trying to move people more to a service plan and platform rather than a product sale, a hardware sale program. In that regard, our overall sales declined 15%, but our service and other income increased by 25%, not income, I mean, revenue. And it's clear why we're doing that. Our margins -- our gross margins on service hit 77% in 2019 versus 76% in 2018. So our overall plan seems to be working from that standpoint. We are shifting more sales to the service channel rather than the hardware sales.
And the second reason for that is we did introduce EVO-HD in the middle point of last year. And as expected, our customers took a pause to look at that and evaluate it. It is a revolutionary new platform that we're very proud of, but it has taken some time for our customers to review it, test it and adopt it. And in that regard, we did do a press release, I think, last week about a pretty nice order we got for EVOs. I would tell you also, the domestic order that we got for EVOs. I will tell you that we had a rather large international order in the hopper to ship in March of 2020. That was and is delayed because of the coronavirus outbreak. Countries and certainly foreign countries have their hands full with the coronavirus.
So I think the bottom line here is that we are seeing some very good traction. Customers are very receptive to the EVO-HD and the new platform and the connectivity of that platform. And I believe it will be the bellwether for years to come. With that in mind, it did hamper our hardware sales in 2019 as well.
So let's talk about a few other things that have happened more recently. We did complete a $2.5 million underwritten public offering in March at $1.15 per share. Gross proceeds of roughly $3 million. We're very happy to get that done before the coronavirus epidemic really became problematic in the capital market. So we got that done in early March, and we're glad we did that.
Our first quarter revenues, I will say, are very similar to last year, which I think, given the situation, most people would be pretty happy with that. But for -- I would -- thinking for myself and I think even Stan, we're both very disappointed in that. We started the year, January, February with double-digit increases over prior year revenues. We were seeing good traction. The EVO is starting to hit a little bit. And in March, we had several large international orders as well as domestic orders that were set to go out. We even had them on pallets ready to ship at one time. That got delayed because of the impact of the coronavirus. So although first quarter is going to be very similar to last year, we're disappointed in that we did not get the opportunity to ship orders that should have been shipped, given normal times rather than what we're currently experiencing.
So also, I would tell you that the Axon litigation, we did a press release that announced the oral arguments were supposed to happen today. And because of the coronavirus thing and other factors, the appellate court issued a order that they were not going to do oral arguments that they were going to rule upon the briefs as submitted by the 2 party. Stan and I really looking through the tea leaves, and it's only our judgment is we believe that's good news, but we don't know until they actually issue. And quite frankly, we don't know when they're going to issue with what's going on, when they're going to meet and go over the briefs and determine an outcome for that appellate hearing so.
Yes. But it's my understanding, Tom, that the briefs will be submitted today. So that's still taking place. In talking to our litigation team, we believe that maybe because of the fact that they're not now going actually move a little quicker. So we still think, at least from what we're hearing, unless there's -- they shut -- completely shut the courts down and don't allow them to make any kind of rulings, that we should see something, I would say, within the next 45 days. So it could be rather quickly as they're not having people walking through in and out of the courtroom. They could be sitting around the table right now, and all parties looking at it and saying what your thoughts on it so. But we do think that the fact that they did not -- and they did elect to go ahead and instead of postponing it, went ahead and did a what do you want to say just said, "Hey, guys, you don't need to come here. We've got enough or believe that our position, we can get to a position to rule on it by just using the briefs." We look upon that as somewhat favorable. We would have thought that if, for some reason, they weren't interested in hearing our side of it, as we're the ones that actually filed it, they would at least postpone and given us our day in court. So we're hopeful that it will continue to move forward, and we'll get something on that in the next 45 days.
Okay. Thank you, Stan. And I just got a couple of other things I'll mention. We were deficient with the NASDAQ listing requirements, continued listing requirements. We filed several 8-Ks and releases that described that event. Stan and I met with the NASDAQ Board in February and presented our compliance plan, which we're happy to announce or I think we have announced already that the NASDAQ was very receptive and approved our plan. And gave us until June 30, 2020, to achieve that plan.
Now with the current environment, we kind of expect that, that will be delayed because of everything that's going on with the coronavirus, and I know there's a lot more NASDAQ companies with deficiency issues as well as us that the NASDAQ is dealing with. So I hope that, that gets delayed, but I don't know that it will get delayed. And we don't -- and we will certainly appraise the market when and if we hear from the NASDAQ on the exact date, if that's going to be delayed at all.
I would tell you from a coronavirus perspective, we have made some changes in our operating plans, including having people work from home. And I think you guys have seen -- hopefully, you've seen the press release this morning. We've taken on a new line of products to help our first responders deal with the coronavirus onset to disinfect cars, any kind of surface, jails, tables, whatever it is, the product that I'm sure you guys will want to know more about has been around for a number of years. We have a distributorship for that, and we're going to hit our customer base with an e-mail blast today, and we expect and we hope that we'll get a very good response from that because this is an exciting product. It's nontoxic, and it's approved by the EPA to fight the coronavirus as well as a number of other contaminants and bacteria and viruses, including HIV, MRSA, I can't remember, C. diff, Salmonella.
There's a ton of them. If you go to our website, and can bear with us that it's getting more and more information put on it, virtually every hour. But you could get on there and get a pretty good understanding, and there's some links that take you to the -- I think it's the FDA and the EPA, the appropriate government sites to give you a little more understanding of what it's capable of doing. And just touching on it, Tom, since we're on it right now is the product itself, we've been knowledgeable about it and setter and did a little bit of preliminary, I would say, marketing and talking to a few of our key customers, if they would have a level of interest in the product. And we were overwhelmed with those that clearly say they have an interest. And in talking to our team, and we realized that this is going to be a situation for sanitation, the cleanliness, on and on, that is going to be looked at, scrutinized. Even our government has said that they're concerned about if we get past these next month or so that still need to be on high alert on cleanliness and stuff as we go into the flu season later this year, that it could come back around. And until we really get a vaccine for it, it's going to be with us.
So with the thousands of departments they currently buy from us that could utilize it, the amount of taxi cabs, just -- there are multiple customers that we have and have all shown very strong levels of interest in the product. I would be -- we just literally launched it today and told our sales team, and we do have our e-mail blast going out here in a few hours. But just really surprised by the amount of interest and relationship with the bottling company or, let's say, the master distributor that we work very closely with and have had a relationship with for some time. So we are excited about it. We think that this is a area that really could have an impact in our 2020 numbers. And we will update you all in the form of a press release as we see how things play out for, let's just say, the month of April. We'll give you an update and let you know how many gallons or thousands of gallons or whatever the magic number may be, we'll let you know. But we are very excited about this product.
Yes. And I would just add a couple of comments and then turn it back to Stan to -- I'm sure you guys have many comments and questions about where we're headed. But we're looking at this as a new channel for Digital Ally to help first responders, not only first responders, but it really fits in well with the rest of our businesses. We have the event solutions business, the taxi cab, the cruise ships.
Ambulances.
Ambulances. So it really fits like a glove with our current customer list. And obviously, we're going to exploit that. But we believe it's going to bring in new channels as well and give us avenues to also sell them hardware and services surrounding our recording products. So anyway, we're excited about it. We're looking for other ones, too. I mean there's other products that we're looking at that we may take on in a similar category. But look for us to try and improve revenues through other channels as well.
So with that, I'll turn it back to Stan, and I'm sure you guys have more questions for us.
Yes. And Tom, as everybody should know that's on the call that we also have been making quite a bit of headway in regards to our new breathalyzer that has our patent associated with it, that continues to come along real nicely in the development, and we still anticipate being able to have that out later this year. So yes, we will continue to look at mainly different products. I don't know if I want to say channels, different products that can really easily fit into the existing distribution channels that we have. And then that will have a ripple effect leading into other areas. Obviously, with our relationship and partnerships with a lot of the entities from football to NASCAR, those are avenues that will continue to -- we'll be able to expand on with some of our products. And we also will be actually bringing in sub distributors in regards to a couple of our products that have their own channels and network in place too. So I'm excited about what we have ahead of us and really would just like to see, like all of us, things get back to normalcy so that we can all be shaking hands again at some point in time and being able to talk business across from the table versus over the phone. So anyways, we'll go ahead and open this up for the Q&A side of our call.
[Operator Instructions] The first question will come from Brian Kinstlinger with Alliance Global Partners.
With the current revenue base, how are you addressing overhead? And can you talk about with your business being essential but volumes down, where you can take operating expenses? It looks like you were at about $15 million in 2019, which I assume includes the $3 million in litigation expense you discussed. So where can we take that to right now?
Yes. Overhead wise, we've pared down I wouldn't say substantially, but we've pared down in the areas that really are flat or actually not existent in this economy right now with coronavirus on thing like event solutions and likewise. So we've made cutbacks, both employees and overhead in those areas that make sense. But I would tell you that certain areas of commercial is revving up. Private security seems to be doing real well as well as our regular law enforcement business. So there's areas that we have cut back in because those areas are dead in the water right now until the economy really opens back up. As far as what to expect from an overhead perspective, it will go down. But I cannot tell you how much, depending on where else we cut and what else we do. But we're looking at every overhead expense, obviously, and trying to make it right versus what kind of revenues we're generating from those channels.
Yes. A lot of it -- some of the expenses, as you can imagine, instead of us going to trade shows and other events, I mean, even all our outside reps are basically considered inside reps. I mean, they are happen to keep the relationships by phone. We do a tremendous amount of webinars to try to keep everyone educated and get new business through those means, but the expenses of being out on the road is nonexistent pretty much right now. So there are a lot of areas that the expenses came down dramatically, let alone the areas where we really did have to pare back, as Tom was saying, that because the opportunities are nonexistent for a while.
Great. And then in terms of the disrupted supply chain, what supplies are you having trouble procuring? Where are they procured from? And is there any communication from suppliers as to when this might improve?
Yes. As you might expect, we do get some of our camera products from the orient, specifically China, Philippines, South Korea. Those suppliers obviously have been affected, but it really hasn't hurt us that bad. We've had some delays, but we've eventually got the ordered quantities and products. So yes, we have been affected. It has slowed down. But we are getting products from those companies and suppliers, and we don't think that, that will be an ongoing problem once the coronavirus thing kind of passes.
Great. And then last question, can you expand on the press release comment that you are evaluating acquiring distribution rights for several products? Just some more detail on what this might mean.
Yes. As we look at and seen the level of interest in the current products that we're out there with, it's clearly opened our eyes up to other potential products such as even hardware, that we have the capability of being able to produce and could implement and sell-through our existing channels. So we're looking at what all, not only the current product, but additional ones along this line, how we can expand on that. And again, as I mentioned, we're still excited about our breathalyzer hitting the marketplace. We do have a next-generation of body camera that we have not pumped the brakes on at all. We're still going full speed ahead for it to get to development. We have the, what we call the 250 in a box or the 250 fleet, that's for over-the-road truckers. And that product, too, is right around the corner. So there's several additional products that we have -- we've been working on and others that we believe now with sort of the changing environment that we clearly have the capabilities to get into. And again, one, I just need to wait a little bit longer and explain on, but there are some even medical devices that we have the capability of design and producing.
I hope the family and all the friends out there are being safe and everyone is healthy. As you know, I'm on the island, and we're becoming the hotspot. So my thoughts and prayers are out to you guys and your families, put it that way.
The next question is from Bryan Lubitz with Aegis.
Yes, in your way as well, Bryan.
All right. So first thing I want to touch base on and then I'll segue back to, obviously, COVID, but I want to start on the service revenue for the quarter and obviously for the full year, going up substantially from last year, as you guys are segueing from being more of a product-based sales company to having that residual sticky business, if you will. Can you guys give us a mix of how much of that is actually from generating off of the data plans, monthly storage fees and how much of it is actually from, I guess, warranties and services?
Yes. The lion's share of that, Bryan, is from extended warranty services and installation services, if you will. The data plans, as you might expect, they're covered over 3 to 5 years. So it's a much smaller number but there's really no costs associated with it. So if you look at shared numbers, the warranty revenue -- the extended warranty revenue is larger and the installation revenue is larger. But there's virtually no cost, very little cost on the data plans. And that's -- so it's a little misleading from that standpoint.
Okay. So now off of that, Tom, in regards to gross margins and being that there's very little cost in the data, how do we get that number up? Is it just by you guys signing new contracts? Or is that 3-year deal, does it kind of preclude you even with new contracts getting that number higher and higher?
No. I think the major effect on this year and even last year's gross margin numbers is some reserves we took against inventory of the older product. We were introducing the EVO-HD and so we knew that the older product lines would really dissipate. So we took some necessary reserves in order to get our inventory in line with bringing on this new EVO business. So that's really what's affecting that. I think now that we've pretty much got that behind us, we know where we're headed there. I think you're going to see some growth in the gross margins just from the standpoint that we've already taken our hits on obsolete and excess inventory.
Okay. As far as your sales team, is it -- I don't want to say a mandate, but is it of utmost importance that they sign up customers with the data program, being that the margins are so good there?
Yes. Well, we're -- this new EVO-HD platform is a connected platform, Bryan. So by definition, you sell on EVO-HD, you're generally selling a connected program, a cloud-based program. We're also moving full speed ahead on our body cameras because we just don't make much money on the hardware for body camera. The real money is in the data plan and the storage. So we're moving head long into that, and we're trying to phase out the older storage requirements, which would be local in nature. So we're moving posthaste into that type of scenario.
Okay, super. Now I also want to touch base with -- Stan, I believe you mentioned that you guys even had product on the skids to go out on the pallets and then you kind of had to pull it back. Is that based upon international orders where our borders are being shut down, their borders are being shut down? What's the reason why that order didn't actually get shipped out?
It was, Bryan. I mean, because of the virus, they said, "Look, we want to put everything on hold. You mind just holding that until we see where things ramp. Because it's one thing to sit there and have the product sitting on our dock versus sitting on theirs because they still need to have us come over and assist in the deployment and get them all set up. And so it's not that the opportunity or the orders are going away. It's just a matter of timing when the travel opens back up for us all. I mean just to give you an example, Bryan. I mean, unfortunately, we had -- one of our key employees was out in Colorado and just to Kansas has to be self-quarantined for 14 days. So it's just one of those that stay at home is -- even though we're somewhat exempt and have the ability to come into the office, we're still trying to do the best we can to keep those people that can work from home at home and safe. So it just got pushed back a little bit.
Okay. So I just want to be clear. No orders have been canceled, they've just been delayed?
Yes. So here's where I'm at. I mean, one of the things, as you know, we gave guidance of the $13.5 million. And I know that a lot of people have been pulling their guidance. We have still seen law enforcement to be somewhat strong. We also realized with some of the new products that we have coming in and the strength that they could add to our overall numbers. I'm reluctant to pull our guidance at this point as I believe that we still clearly have the capabilities of hitting our number. And that's going to be a big year-over-year number as you can tell, I mean, we're still saying that we'll exceed $13.5 million. Now you let me get another 30, 60, 90 days down the road, and we continue to see things put on hold, then I may, on our next call, be a little different. But at this point in time, I'm pretty excited about -- still very excited about 2020.
Okay. So you're still confident in the numbers, and that's good and obviously, you guys are essential. One of the things I can tell you, just as a fact, it's being reported here in New York by the Wall Street Journal that over 1,500 police officers actually have the virus. It's -- so I don't know -- obviously, they're still working. They're still out there as a whole, but those 1,500 at home. The 5,000 body camera order that you guys got from the police force down, I believe, in South America, is that something where as we're seeing disruption with them as well, being that they're international? Or is that something that's moving the full speed ahead?
No. With them being international, it's slowing up a little bit.
Okay. So that is for that.
But again that one was never in the -- in what I want to say, the Q in regards to our numbers. We never had that one in -- that wasn't even on the radar in regards to our $13.5 million number, by the way.
Yes. When you guys gave guidance in October of last year, what you're saying is that guidance for $13.5 million does not include the 5,000 body cameras.
Yes. We didn't know how that was going to play out.
Okay. And one other thing, Stan, you had mentioned back in the third quarter when you gave guidance and I've also seen you on Bloomberg and given some interviews and radio dial ins and things of that nature that you guys are -- you expect the first quarter to be really big with new contracts. Obviously, we've had some, but you guys are really close to a nationwide fleet in terms of a trucking company. Can you elaborate on that at all?
So that still the works. This is still looks like it's coming together. And what we did and have been doing is working with a couple companies, one in particular, that really has, I would say, the last ingredients that we need to finalize the recipe that we're putting together for the over-the-road industry. We have pretty much everything, and they're actually missing what we have. And so we look to try to get that still finalized right away and then that would be a very big launch that we would anticipate because of our partnerships in a lot of areas would have a very good and quick significance to our numbers this year.
Being specific, Stan, is that related to the partnership you guys announced with mobile insight data?
That is absolutely one of them, absolutely.
Okay. And now that guidance came before that announcement of that contract. So obviously, if you announce something with the partnership with them that would be in addition to the $13 million as well?
We knew this was coming into play. We just don't know how big it is. So we've been working on this for some time. So we just -- we have to see. Let me have a good quarter of being able to be out on the streets, and then I'll have a better sense of how to give some guidance.
Okay. And the last thing I would say to you is, with your press release today, again, everyone is being affected by coronavirus. Obviously, you guys are moving into a new revenue stream, potentially with the partnership and distributing of the DanaLite solution. Are you guys going to just be a distributor and you're using your channels that you already have with your customers, i.e., the ambulances and the police stations and taxies, et cetera? Are you actually going to be sending in crews to do the disinfecting in all of the work related to that product as well?
Right. At this time, we're just being what I would call more of a master distributor. We have relationships with others that will be sub distributors that have different marketing channels that could utilize the product as well. But we clearly have a very nice agreement and with room to bring on some additional sub distributors. And at that point in time, that will be our role. Now some of these end users would be those that would be utilizing the product for cleaning facilities and as such. But we don't see us walking in there doing that at this point.
So you don't have to worry about, obviously, getting your workforce suited up and massed up and actually flying around the country, you're just going to ship the product via your partnership with the solution DanaLite?
Right, right. I think what we'll do is continue to provide the product. And then those that have a lot more experience at it than us, let them go ahead and do the actual applications.
Okay. And now as far as that market being concerned, obviously, here, again, Long Island, New York were kind of a epicenter. We're all kind of getting, it's very fluid, let's put it that way, the whole situation of the coronavirus. But you don't have to be a rocket scientist to figure out 2 things that America needs to get back to work is going to be testing and obviously cleaning. How big do you see this market being for this type of a product? I mean, do you guys see it moving into schools and hospitals? Or is it just going to be police and ambulances?
Bryan, we've had numbers that we believe if, they play out, because you do know that we do have relationships with schools, taxi cabs, ambulances, police, cruise ships on and on and on, that I don't want to say something that's just crazy. But I mean, you guys can put 2 and 2 together. I mean, it may -- you may see it, at least for 2020 reinvent the company in some fashion, and I'd hate to say this, but to where you guys are calling up and saying how many tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands gallons did you sell this quarter versus how many body cameras. I mean it's the hot item right now. And some of the preliminary numbers that we hear that some of our end users are going through and would like to give us a shot are just mind-boggling how big they can be. So right, I don't -- I really don't want to touch it. You guys are going to have to put 2 and 2 together on that one. I'll make sure -- and again, I'll try to give an update at the end of the month when I've got the numbers and just do something in the form of a press release as asked everyone that we've been very pleased with the launch. To date, we have seen orders and shipments in excess of x, whatever that may be. So that will give you as much visibility as I can give you.
The next question is from Allan Lyons with Vestal Venture Capital.
Stan and Tom, I'm glad to hear you guys are all safe and healthy at this tremulous time for sure. The question I had, I noticed you have $4.8 million warrants outstanding, assuming you can, have you given any consideration to reduce the exercise price for 1 month and that people exercise that, let's say, at the current price, they can do it. And if they don't, it reverts back to the original terms.
That -- some of that's been thrown around as an option. And instead of doing anything new and additional dilution for is something new coming off the table, I think what -- sort of where we're postured right now is just really wanting to see how a couple of events play out. I mean, let's just say that we are fortunate enough to have ruling -- and fortunate enough that the ruling goes in our favor in regards to the appeal, I would think it'd have a very, very, very strong impact on the stock. And so a lot of those warrants would be getting exercised at, I believe, at full price. So we have taken into consideration what you're saying and how to play the cards every day. But that's a great comment that you made there.
I understand. And you don't want to do it prematurely. But obviously, cash is king here and depending how these turn out, you don't know. So I'm glad you're thinking about it, and that's for you guys to decide.
Listen, I want to thank everybody for calling in today and all the great questions. On behalf of Digital Ally and all of our employees, we, too, wish everyone the best and to be safe, and I can't thank our first responders and all our healthcare workers and so many people that are still out there on the front lines doing what they can for the betterment of us all. So we appreciate everybody's effort, and we'll do the best to keep everyone informed on how we're doing. And everybody be safe, and we'll talk to you soon. Thank you.
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for participating in today's conference call. You may now disconnect.
Good day, and welcome to Dow First Quarter 2020 Earnings Call. [Operator Instructions] Also, today's call is being recorded.
I would now like to turn the call over to Colleen Kay. Please go ahead, ma'am.
Good morning, everyone. Thank you for joining us to discuss the first quarter financial results for Dow. We're making this call available via webcast, and we have prepared slides to supplement our comments during this conference call. They are posted on the Investor Relations section of Dow's website and through the link to our webcast.
I'm Colleen Kay, Investor Relations Vice President for Dow. And joining me on the call today are Jim Fitterling, Dow's Chairman and Chief Executive Officer; and Howard Ungerleider, President and Chief Financial Officer.
Please read the forward-looking statement disclaimer contained in the earnings news release and slides. During our call, we will make forward-looking statements regarding our expectations or predictions about the future. Because these statements are based on current assumptions and factors that involve risks and uncertainties, our actual performance and results may differ materially from our forward-looking statements. Dow's Forms 10-Q and 10-K include detailed discussion of principal risks and uncertainties which may cause such differences.
Unless otherwise specified, first quarter 2019 historical financial measures presented today are on a pro forma basis, and all financials, where applicable, exclude significant items. We'll also refer to non-GAAP measures. A reconciliation to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure and other associated disclosures is contained in the Dow earnings release, in the slides that supplement our comments today and on the Dow website.
On Slide 2, you'll see our agenda for the call. Jim will begin with the first quarter highlights, share details on Dow's response to COVID-19 and discuss the operating performance of the segments. Howard will provide an update on Sadara, then move into a financial overview of the quarter and provide our modeling guidance. And finally, Jim will close with some remarks on key factors that differentiate Dow. Following that, we will take your questions.
With that, I'll turn the call over to Jim.
Thank you, Colleen, and thanks to everyone for joining us this morning. Before we begin, I'd like to first recognize Neal Sheorey for the tremendous role he's played in our Investor Relations team over the past 4 years. We're glad to have him leading our Coatings & Performance Monomers business. And also, a very warm welcome to Colleen Kay, who succeeded Neal as our new Investor Relations Vice President this quarter.
Starting on Slide 3, I'll begin with some notable highlights from the first quarter. We delivered net sales in line with our adjusted guidance as we met strong demand in our consumer staple, nondurable applications such as food, health and hygiene, packaging and surfactants and solvents for cleaning products. Our volume, excluding Hydrocarbons & Energy, declined 1%, reflecting the impact of reduced economic activity in China with the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic and containment interventions. Our volume in China was down 25% sequentially as seasonal decline due to the Chinese New Year was intensified by the sudden demand reduction due to the virus.
Cash flow was again a noteworthy headline. We generated a solid $1.2 billion in cash from continuing operations, a 79% conversion of operating EBITDA to cash from operation, and our free cash flow increased by $240 million year-over-year. This was underpinned by 3 actions: one, our quick response to shifting trends in global energy prices and regional demand, which enabled us to liberate cash from working capital; two, tight capital and expense controls, including more than $30 million in stranded cost savings; and three, a nonoperational cash inflow as we recovered a $259 million tax withholding from the Canadian tax authorities related to the 2019 judgment against Nova. We ended the quarter with approximately $12 billion of cash and available liquidity, and we took further actions to reinforce our financial strength and flexibility.
Early in the quarter, we opportunistically executed a EUR 2.25 billion euro-denominated debt issuance, achieving a weighted average coupon of about 1%. We immediately used the proceeds to repay debt, extend our debt maturity profile and reduce our financing costs. As a result, today, we have no major long-term debt due until the second half of 2023. And finally, we did all of this while also prioritizing returns to our shareholders. We returned nearly $650 million to owners through our industry-leading dividend as well as opportunistic share repurchases.
The quarter presented us with unprecedented headwind, and we responded by flexing our operational and financial capabilities to protect our employees and facilities, meet customer demand and fortify our financial position. This brings me to our COVID-19 pandemic response on Slide 4.
I'm incredibly proud of the determination and resilience shown by the Dow team. To the many heroes on the front lines helping to ensure the health and well-being of our communities around the world, thank you. These are unique and trying times for every one of us. And it has been inspiring to see the global community rally together to help solve this challenge. The Dow team has our share of heroes as well, particularly those employees on the front line who have kept our operations running, staying close to our customers and adapting with their needs and making sure that our essential products needed around the world are still flowing from Dow plants to our customer's gate. In these challenging times, Dow people are at their very best and most resourceful.
Turning to Slide 5. Safety is always our first priority at Dow. And protecting the health and safety of our employees and communities is the first thing we did. We rapidly deployed our crisis management framework and activated site-by-site plans to maintain business continuity and secure safe, reliable operations. Today, 2/3 of our workforce is working from home, and Dow sites continue to operate with reinforced health, safety and security protocols. In fact, close to 100% of our sites are operational. In addition, our business and government affairs teams are working with federal, state and local officials and agencies to share best practices and help unlock solutions to enable the continued flow of critical goods and products as well as recommendations for how to get the economy reopened safely.
Moving to Slide 6. As an industry considered essential to global infrastructure, the chemical industry and
Dow have a critical role to play. We've remained agile by modifying our manufacturing processes and product wheels to meet increased demand for raw materials used to produce disinfectants, PPE, food ingredients and packaging. We've adapted 5 Dow sites around the world to produce hand sanitizer for donations to local hospitals and other health care organizations.
And just recently, we developed a simplified face shield design to help protect health care professionals on the front line. We collaborated internally to produce and donate 100,000 face shields to Michigan hospitals, and we also made the innovative design openly available to fabricators around the world in order to help accelerate production rates of critically needed PPE globally. These are just a few examples of how Dow is utilizing our materials science expertise to combat COVID-19, which is spurring new innovation ideas for the future.
Moving to Slide 7. We understand the extreme stress that these unprecedented times placed on our communities and people, so we've committed $3 million to COVID-19 relief efforts for immediate support and to build community resilience in the recovery phase. The outpouring of support from our workforce has been inspiring. And we're giving them creative ways to provide their time and expertise above and beyond the things that they're already doing to help Dow and our customers.
I'll close my comments on the first quarter with a quick review of our segment results on Slide 8. Packaging & Specialty Plastics operating EBIT was $580 million, down from the year-ago period. The benefits of consumer-led packaging demand growth and additional stranded cost savings were more than offset by lower polyethylene and global energy prices as well as reduced equity earnings. The Packaging & Specialty Plastics business delivered a 1% volume growth, supported by strong end-market demand, particularly in health and hygiene, rigid packaging and flexible food and specialty packaging applications. The business delivered volume gains in Asia Pacific versus the year-ago period despite the demand reduction in China from the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Hydrocarbons & Energy reported both lower volume and price. Volume declines were primarily due to reduced ethylene sales from increased internal derivative consumption.
Industrial Intermediates & Infrastructure operating EBIT was $175 million, down from the year-ago period, as demand growth in the Industrial Solutions business was more than offset by margin compression in polyurethane applications as well as equity losses. The segment also benefited from lower year-over-year planned maintenance turnaround costs.
The Polyurethanes & Construction Chemicals business reported lower net sales, primarily driven by lower global energy prices and decreased demand, particularly in furniture and bedding, automotive, appliance and aircraft deicing applications.
Industrial Solutions reported volume growth, supported by strong demand in surfactants and solvents used in cleaning applications. Volume grew in all geographic regions, except EMEAI, which reported a modest decline.
And finally, Performance Materials & Coatings operating EBIT was $162 million as volume growth in coatings end markets was offset by a decline in silicones applications and local price decreases.
Consumer Solutions reported demand growth in upstream siloxane and home and personal care end markets in the U.S. and Canada. However, these were more than offset by volume declines in other regions, which included the impact of COVID-19 in Asia Pacific.
Coatings & Performance Monomers reported volume growth, primarily driven by increased demand in Performance Monomers. Coatings volume grew in the U.S. and Canada, led by road markings and wood coatings, but was more than offset by reduced architectural coatings demand in Asia Pacific and EMEAI, driven by impacts from COVID-19.
Finally, I want to showcase the swift and early actions the Dow management team continues to take as these unprecedented events play out. We are actively working to preserve our financial strength and flexibility while also maintaining business continuity. And so today, we're announcing another set of proactive measures, which are summarized on Slide 9.
Let me be clear, Dow's operational and financial playbook have put us in a very good position. The actions we're announcing today build upon our focus to provide additional agility, drive cash generation and adjust our spending to current realities. To that end, the following near-term interventions are already underway and will gain momentum as we move through the remainder of the year. We have targeted a further $500 million release of cash from working capital. We are reducing expenses by $350 million, and we are decreasing our capital expenditures target to $1.25 billion, a reduction of $750 million versus last year. We're achieving this further reduction in a way that will maintain our long-term competitiveness and our most attractive growth projects.
Also, we are taking action to idle facilities or reduce operating rates in line with demand trends in the U.S., Europe and Latin America. We're working with our customers to get orders placed with enough lead time so that we can make the best asset decisions across our network and manage bottlenecks in the supply chain to deliver product where it's needed.
In plastics, to balance production to current demand, we are temporarily idling 3 polyethylene and 2 elastomers production units for at least 30 days. The plants have an aggregate annualized capacity of approximately 2 billion pounds and are located on the U.S. Gulf Coast and in Argentina. This equates to approximately 10% of the business' global annual capacity.
Our polyurethanes business has strong participation in durable goods segments such as automotive, furniture and bedding, appliances and construction. These segments are being heavily impacted by government-mandated shutdowns around the world. As a result, we're running our polyurethanes assets, including propylene oxide and MDI, at reduced operating rates.
And in silicones, we are running reduced rates across our global grid of siloxane trains, and our Zhangjiagang production facility in China will remain down on an extended planned turnaround into May. We also benefit from full flexibility at our silicones finishing assets, allowing us to quickly respond to demand in all formulated silicones applications around the world.
We are taking these actions with a thoughtful approach that will allow us to quickly respond as demand improves when economies around the world reopen. And while the timing and shape of a recovery remain uncertain, these actions position Dow to emerge even stronger when the global economy rebounds.
With that, let me hand it over to Howard.
Thanks, Jim, and good morning, everyone.
Turning to Slide 10. I'll start with an update on a key milestone reached at Sadara. On our last earnings call, we shared that Sadara was very close to signing its final logistics service agreement. I'm pleased to report the JV has now achieved that milestone. This agreement was important as it was the final substantive step to project completion. As a result, Sadara and the JV partners have now begun the debt re-profiling process and are in parallel currently engaged in discussions with its lenders. We expect this dialogue to advance over the course of this year, and we'll provide further updates as that unfolds.
While that financing discussion is progressing, Sadara is making good progress on executing its longer- term operating structure improvements. And from this year, Dow remains on track with its planned loans to Sadara, which remain in the range of $500 million.
Moving to Slide 11. Net sales were $9.8 billion. At the company level, local price declined 8% year-over- year, driven primarily by lower global energy prices. Currency decreased sales by 1%. Volume declined 2% year-over-year, or 1% excluding the Hydrocarbons & Energy business. Equity losses were $89 million, primarily driven by lower results at the Kuwait and Thai joint ventures.
Operating EBIT was $843 million, and operating EPS was $0.59. Positive drivers during the quarter included demand growth in food packaging, health and hygiene and cleaning applications on resilient consumer purchasing trends in response to COVID-19 as well as continued stranded cost removal. These gains were more than offset by year-over-year margin compression, notably in the polyurethanes and silicones chains as well as lower equity earnings.
Overall, the financial impact of COVID-19 and the substantial decline in crude oil prices was in line with our expectation of an approximately $200 million headwind in the quarter.
Moving to cash flow. We generated $1.2 billion of cash from continuing operations and increased our free cash flow by $240 million versus the year-ago period. Our earnings to cash conversion of 79% represented a significant improvement year-over-year. All of these metrics were helped by a solid release of cash from working capital, lower transaction costs as well as the cash inflow from recovery of $259 million from the Canadian tax authority related to the 2019 judgment against Nova.
Finally, we allocated our free cash flow in a balanced way, in line with our capital allocation priorities. In addition to the dividend, we repurchased $125 million of our own shares. Going forward, as a prudent measure, given the economic uncertainty, we are temporarily suspending our share repurchases for the balance of the year. We will, however, continue to reevaluate this lever in light of macro trends and our free cash flow generation.
Moving to Slide 12. Dow remains well-equipped to navigate the current environment and ensure our financial flexibility through the cycle. We ended the first quarter with nearly $12 billion in total liquidity, including $3.6 billion in cash and equivalents. In the first quarter, we prudently drew down $800 million on our uncommitted lines to further bolster our cash position. Recall that last year, we extended our $5 billion revolver out to 2024. And importantly, all of our more than $8 billion of committed facilities remain untapped.
With our solid liquidity position, we have clear capital allocation priorities to maximize value, ensuring safe and reliable operations continues to be our #1 priority. And financially, the dividend is our top priority, followed by additional debt paydown. In fact, over the past year, you've seen us take proactive liability management actions, including over $3 billion of gross debt reduction in 2019 and extensions to our maturity profile, and we continued this practice this past quarter.
We opportunistically tapped the Eurobond market issuing EUR 2.25 billion of debt at an all-in rate of approximately 1%. We used the proceeds to repay debt and further extend our maturing profile. As a result, today, we have no substantive long-term debt maturities due over the next 3 years. These actions have also benefited earnings as our net interest expense run rate is now more than $100 million lower than 2019 and $200 million lower than 2018. As you can see, our financial strength and flexibility provides us solid foundation to navigate the current environment. And you should expect us to continue being active and opportunistic in further fortifying our financial position.
Before I move into modeling guidance, I want to take a minute to discuss how we view the quarter ahead and the range of potential scenarios we're planning for. These are clearly uncertain and unprecedented times. And due to the limited forward visibility, we felt it even more critical that we provide an assessment using the best information available to us year-to-date, how the second quarter and the rest of the year could unfold and the assumptions behind our range of potential outcomes.
Our forward guidance is based on our expectation that virus containment will continue in the coming weeks, and the global economy will gradually and sustainably resume as industries and businesses return to work and global government stimuli take hold. The progression of containment and recovery that we saw in China is now playing out in Europe, and we expect similar patterns to evolve in the U.S. and other countries. So our corridor of potential outcomes assumes that the second quarter will show the largest global economic and chemical industry impacts from COVID-19 and the collapse in energy prices.
Using China as a reference, our modeling guidance assumes recovery for Dow begins as economies reopen. Reports suggest that overall activity in China did improve quickly year-over-year in February to March, but improvements have been uneven across industries. Should the restart of the global economy be materially different than our assumptions, we intend to provide you with updates as the quarter progresses.
With that being said, let's move to Slide 13, where we highlight adjustments to the full year items we shared in January based on current realities. As Jim mentioned in his comments, our 2020 earnings should benefit from tailwinds of $350 million of expense reductions. We expect higher equity losses as our JVs also face similar trends as our core business. And we now expect a higher tax rate due to shifts in the geographic mix of earnings in our core business as well as lower equity earnings.
To preserve flexibility in this slower macro environment, we have reduced our CapEx spending target by $750 million versus 2019. We will have a cash tailwind of more than $400 million related to lower integration and separation costs for the balance of the year. And as I mentioned before, we have put further share repurchases temporarily on hold at least until we get better visibility on cash flow.
Getting into the details of the quarter ahead, let's please turn to Slide 14. We see second quarter sales in the range of $7.5 billion to $8.5 billion on our assumption of demand production peaking in the second quarter with the spread of COVID-19 and slowing economic activity globally. We have outlined on the slide our current sales expectations by segment in our normal fashion.
We're also providing corridors this quarter, along with high- and low-volume estimates so you understand the range of scenarios we see as possible for each segment. This is an attempt to give you a level of forward visibility in a very difficult period of forecast. Let me please reemphasize, though, these are estimates only.
As usual, we're highlighting the key EBIT drivers in the quarter on a sequential basis. In the Packaging & Specialty Plastics segment, while we expect continued robust consumer-driven demand for our food, health and hygiene and packaging applications, we see this being more than offset by demand softness in automotive and infrastructure applications as well as lower average energy prices. With the dramatic shift in oil dynamics, we expect naphtha cracking to continue its advantage, which should support our European cracker margins as well as keep demand relatively resilient there. And our actions in the Americas to idle capacity should help balance supply and demand until the economies around the world reopen.
In the Industrial Intermediates & Infrastructure segment, we're seeing high demand in the Industrial Solutions for our solvent and surfactants that make cleaning products effective to combat COVID-19. However, we expect that to only partly offset trough MDI spreads and weakness in end-market demand for our polyurethane products, particularly in consumer durable, construction and automotive applications.
And finally, in Performance Materials & Coatings, we expect demand softness for industrial applications and coatings as well as weakened fundamentals in our upstream siloxanes and acrylic building blocks, which are experiencing a challenging pricing environment on weak supply and demand fundamentals.
During the second quarter, we also anticipate we will begin to feel the positive effects of China continuing to slowly reverse the declines of the first quarter. And as the global economy continues to come back online beyond the second quarter, we also expect to see the discrete impacts related to the virus begin to reverse globally.
I'd like to just stress again that the near-term guidance you see here is based on our assumptions for how the COVID-19 containment and recovery could play out as we move through the second quarter and are based on the outlined assumptions. Given the limited visibility, we will remain strongly focused on cash flow and protecting our enterprise priorities.
With that, I'll turn it back to Jim.
Thank you, Howard. Turning to Slide 15. I want to emphasize several factors that we believe set Dow apart and support our competitive position. Given our more than 120-year history, Dow has a strong track record of successfully navigating periods of uncertainty. And as a result, we have built competitive positions and asset flexibility to be prepared for situations like those that we're experiencing today. We call these our points of distinction. And today, I will highlight a few points that set Dow apart.
On Slide 16, Dow's unmatched feedstock flexibility and superior product mix are key factors that underpin the higher and more resilient margins that we deliver across the cycle. We also have a geographic mix of assets that provide a structural hedge to feedstock dynamics. For example, in today's environment, we're able to capture improved cracking margins in Europe and Southeast Asia, which offset some of the margin compression we see in other regions. We have a leading Packaging & Specialty Plastics portfolio with assets designed to be flexible and adapt to feedstock volatility.
Our feedstock flexibility enables us to crack a wider mix of feedstocks. For example, we have 2 to 3x more propane capability than our peers. We can implement this at a furnace-by-furnace level in our crackers. As heavier feedstocks like naphtha become advantaged, another limitation could be co-products. If not managed adequately, ethylene units may be forced to cut rates or switch feedstock. And we've seen some signs of these strains in the industry as demand for co-products are tied to automotive and fuel end markets, which are currently experiencing weak demand. But here, too, Dow has advantages.
We have aromatics processing units in Europe and on the U.S. Gulf Coast, which give us flexibility to consume and process Thai gas from the crackers. We have capabilities of handling increased C4 streams from the cracker, which includes co-cracking to reprocess the C4 in our furnaces. In short, our feedstock flexibility and co-product management capabilities prove their worth over the cycle time and time again, and this period is no different. These capabilities preserve our low cost-to-serve position regardless of which feedstock scenario is advantaged.
Further downstream, our product mix is another differentiating factor. Our mix of polyethylene and functional polymers products delivers a more resilient and higher-margin profile, which begins to stand out in softer periods like we started to see in 2019 and we are seeing today. The benchmarking we've delivered over the past 2 years has highlighted this performance as well. You can find our 2019 benchmarking data in the appendix of this earnings slide presentation and on Dow's investor website.
Another point of distinction comes from the market segments that we've been targeting and the consumer orientation that we have in our products and solutions, which I'll cover on Slide 17. With our primary market verticals of packaging, infrastructure and consumer care, our business portfolio is tilted towards the consumer. And in today's situation, we find that a substantial part of our business is essential to some of the most critical end markets that consumers value.
Related to the pandemic, Dow has a breadth of solutions that are in high demand. We see a strong pull in applications such as intermediates for cleaning products, pharmaceutical ingredients, packaging and nonwovens for gowns, wipes and masks, and food packaging to secure the freshness and safety of our food supply. These are moments when our materials science expertise and technologies prove their worth and play a significant role.
For example, in the pharmaceutical and health and hygiene markets alone, the following are examples of just some of the products enabled by materials science innovation and our diverse set of chemistries: silicone technologies that enable disposable gloves and tissues, detergents and hard surface cleaners, soaps and shampoos; plastics that are vital for syringes, medical tubes, vials, hoses, valves, device and pharma packaging, drapes, gloves and gowns; polyurethane solutions used for hospital bedding, rigid insulation for medicine refrigeration and transport and safety issues; coatings applications for medical devices and tapes, potable water pipes, paper food packaging and paper cups; and our Industrial Solutions team recently found an innovative way to reconfigure existing underutilized assets to increase our volume of isopropyl alcohol by up to 50%. This is a critical raw material for hand sanitizers.
Out of periods of change, new ways of living, working and staying healthy are developing across the diverse markets that we serve, such as improving the performance, comfort and convenience of PPE, smart building and infrastructure solutions for multipurpose spaces, restaurant takeout food packaging, home and surface care solutions and antimicrobials. Dow's materials science know-how and strong design collaborations with customers can help enable new solutions to these developing market needs.
On Slide 18, the last point of distinction I want to highlight is the global scale of our operations. This is something we often take for granted, but the year so far has emphasized just how much of an advantage it provides to our ability to meet customer demand, rapidly adjust and innovate and take advantage of with well-developed, agile, regional supply chains and a deep understanding of the needs of our customers in all of our markets.
Our geographic diversity serves as a natural hedge for our business operations and uniquely positions us to shine in times of crisis and uncertainty. In fact, all of these strengths were on display in the first quarter as our teams rapidly worked through regional and global supply chain complexity, manufacturing limitations and shifting consumer trends. And as we move through the rest of the year, I see these strengths continuing to provide Dow with unique advantages. Altogether, Dow's points of distinction, unmatched feedstock flexibility, a superior product mix, participation in critical end markets and geographic diversity, set us apart and give us a competitive edge today and throughout the cycle.
In summary, Dow is prepared for what's ahead. Our balance sheet is strong, and we have plenty of liquidity to meet our obligations with no significant long-term debt due over the next few years. We continue to take proactive and thoughtful actions, both operationally and financially, with a focus on safety and cash flow, which we firmly believe will serve us well through this period. We have unique points of distinction that differentiate Dow and position us for upside when the economic recovery begins. We have a remarkable team who continues to inspire and deliver every day, and we are focused on navigating through this challenging time, emerging even stronger and continuing to execute our growth playbook. With that, I'll turn it back to Colleen to open the Q&A.
[Operator Instructions] And we'll take our first question from Vincent Andrews with Morgan Stanley.
Maybe I could just ask about how you're thinking about in Packaging & Specialty Plastics. If you look at the price decline that you guided to for 2Q, could you just talk about how much of that is coming out of -- do you think it's going to come out of the U.S. market versus it's just the weak export market or the EU? And how are you thinking about ethane and propane through the quarter? There's been some volatility in ethane over the last months, and propane seems to be pretty -- being pretty stubborn relative to the move in crude so far.
Vince, everybody is doing great here, and thanks for asking. We hope you are, too. Most of the pricing -- and I think what you're saying on pricing is that you're seeing things kind of come to a global kind of a price right now and that you would expect that with what's happened. I think you're going to see a little bit more come out in Europe than in North America. A little bit less in Latin America, a little bit less in the Pacific. Actually, we've started to see exports to China stepping up pretty dramatically. China has reduced the tariffs coming in. And the Chinese economy is starting to rebound versus March. I would say we start to see activity there in late March and through the month of April, so the industrial part of the economy is starting to get rolling again. Consumer part, still a little bit uneven. And then obviously, we did what we did on supply just to balance off demand.
So we had a good strong first quarter. Volumes were flat, slightly up in Packaging & Specialty Plastics, but we're going to see some impact on volumes in the industrial part of the sector in the second quarter, which is why we tightened up some of the supply. And that was primarily due to industrial shipping, industrial applications, automotive applications. We're starting to see the automotive industry talk about coming back here in the month of May and also in the month of May in Europe. So hopefully, we'll see the May, June turn in the economy on the industrial side here in North America, Latin America.
And next, we'll move to John Roberts with UBS.
Can you comment on other industry closures you might be seeing? We don't usually think of Dow as high cost, although ethane has kind of slipped here currently. But are we seeing other closures we haven't heard about yet from competitors in the marketplace?
Yes, John, thanks for the question. We're not closing high-cost assets. We're closing to balance demand. So look, all of these are reasonable cost assets, but the reality is there's been a pretty significant amount of industrial capacity shutdown on the downstream. And so we don't feel like, in this environment, really plowing a lot of material into inventory is the right thing to do. So that's why we're dialing back the capacity.
I have seen some delays and indefinite suspensions of projects. There was one this week in Ohio, the Thai project that was going to go ahead. So we're starting to see some of those kinds of announcements. We're seeing reduced rates across polyurethanes across the globe, basically, and we've got polyurethanes
MDI capacity down in China right now, not us, but competitors do, really to balance out the fact that downstream automotive and appliances and construction for insulation materials has been slow. So I think that's what you're seeing. I think it has less to do with the cost position and more to do with supply/ demand.
And David Begleiter with Deutsche Bank will have our next question.
On the same point, the idling of the Americas ethylene, polyethylene plants, is your decision being influenced at all by the cost competitiveness of these plants given the recent drop in oil prices? And if not, are you concerned about losing any share to competitors who are not being as disciplined as you are?
CEO & Chairman across our plastics business. And ethylene costs are still very low in the U.S. Gulf Coast, so we haven't idled anything on the ethylene side. In fact, right now, probably 9% to 10% of ethylene production capacity is out on the U.S. Gulf Coast. So we'll balance that out.
We've been operating very well from a working capital standpoint. And I think what we're trying to do here is just make sure that we don't plow a lot of material into inventory until we see a good demand signal coming on the back end. We're starting to get good signs. We're starting to get positive signs out of many states in the United States for a May opening and some parts of Europe, like Germany, Austria, Switzerland. And then I think as confidence builds, testing comes along, people are going to be more certain about going back into manufacturing, and consumers will be back in the market. And at that point, it's easy to fire these polyethylene units back up and meet that demand.
And next, we'll move to Jonas Oxgaard with Bernstein.
A follow-up on the previous question there. The 5% to 10% lower ethylene, that seems to be higher than the industry average. How much of that is refilling your own inventory from TX-9? And maybe a sort of a hypothetical, if TX-9 had not been down, do you think you would have been forced to reduce rates more in line with industry average?
Yes. Thanks, Jonas, for the question. Texas-9 is back up, so it's at the $2 million run rate right now. Most of that expansion on Texas-9 was for MEGlobal for their consumption for MEG. And so they've been buying ethylene in the market to really get themselves started up and running, so this supplies them in the marketplace. And I haven't seen any reduction in volumes there.
I think the other thing that's happening is, as you've seen the automotive industry go down, people that are cracking naphtha or cracking heavier don't have much place for some of the aromatics and some of the off-grades to go. And so the rubber industry has been slow. Automotive industry has been slow. So that has brought rates down in some other crackers, and then you've had some more turnaround and outage in other crackers. So as we go into the quarter, we feel like the toughest quarter here is going to be Q2. And so we want to make sure that we balance supply and demand through Q2 and position ourselves to be able to turn things back on and come up as the industry starts to come back.
And we'll move on to Jeff Zekauskas with JPMorgan.
What's your cash tax rate? Is it between 30% and 35%? Or is it lower or higher? And in the United States, how will your feedstock slate in producing ethylene change versus 2019? In 2019, what were your rough percentages of ethane, propane and naphtha? And what do you think they'll be this year?
Let me get Howard to cover the tax rate, while I have to do some CEO math on your cracking question.
All right. I'll wait for you to do CEO math. Hey, Jeff, so look, the tax rate -- the P&L tax rate that we published this morning for Q2 and for the full year is between 30% and 35%, slightly higher than what we had guided to earlier and really 3 issues: lower equity earnings, different yield mix of earnings and then some discrete items. But I would say, on your question on cash tax, it's lower than that rate. I would guide you to something in the mid-20s.
And to your question on cracking, Jeff, and I'll just focus on U.S. Gulf Coast here because that's where the bulk of the flexibility is. Yes, I'd say we were in the 75%, 80% ethane cracking through the year. The balance would be propane and butane and very little talk for the back half of the year. It's 0 on naphtha. Naphtha has come down, but honestly, ethane is still the best crack. And so if ethane gets tight and we start to see prices rise and propane comes into the slate, we'll swing over to our propane flex. And as you know, we can swing 70% of the capacity over to propane. So we've got that flexibility built into what we're modeling. And I'm optimistic that this is a more resilient gas market than people are estimating.
And we'll move on to Hassan Ahmed with Alembic Global.
Just wanted to sort of continue with this theme of the feedstock side of things. Let's just assume for a second that the feedstock environment that we are in right now is the new normal in terms of roughly where crude oil pricing is, this assertion that in this lower crude oil pricing environment, obviously, you'll see curtailments and cuts on the shale side of things. Maybe ethane isn't as advantaged as it used to be. So now sort of beyond the extreme near term, if that is the feedstock cost environment, how do you see the second wave of cracker and derivative sort of units play out?
I mean, in theory, the CTO/MTO side will not look that competitive, maybe naphtha looks a bit more competitive. Certainly, whoever has flexibility will be better off than those that don't. And then you have this whole sort of notion of a lot of capacity in theory coming online eventually in China. A lot of the facilities here in the U.S. just being pure ethane-based facilities. I mean how do you see those -- all of those sort of different factors playing out if feedstocks continue to act the way they have over the last couple of months?
Thanks, Hassan. That's a lot in that question. But I would say right now, if things continued where they are today, we'd say there's about 21 million metric tons, about 11% of C2 capacity that's at risk. That's either due to age or the scale or the high conversion cost or their feedstock cracking capability. I think one of the assumptions that everybody made with naphtha coming down was that the whole world was going to switch to naphtha cracking. But what people forget is that you make so many byproducts on naphtha, and there's no home for those byproducts. So those byproduct credits go away. At the end of the day, ethane and propane still remain the most competitive crack, and we think that's going to continue.
The other assumption that goes into this then is what happens to oil price, and oil has responded to just an unbelievable slowdown in demand, which is primarily because we told everybody to stay at home and nobody is traveling. But what we're seeing in China is people are going back. Traffic rates in China for car traffic and truck traffic are back up to 80% of what they were pre-COVID. And I think when people come back here, they're going to come back into their cars. That's going to tighten up the demand side or the demand side on oil. At the same time, some of these supply adjustments are going to come back in.
So I'm not predicting that we're going to go to this is the oil demand for the rest of the future. I think if you look over a long, long time, that oil demand growth tracks population and what's going on around the world with the development of the economy. We'll get back to that. The question for everybody is just, what's the time frame? Are people going to -- if we get a test and we get a treatment, are people going to get optimistic and go back faster? Or is this going to take longer than people think?
And Hassan, on your CTO/MTO question, I would say about $6.5 million of that $21 million is CTO/MTO, which with oil below $50, that's -- those are really stressed assets.
And we'll move on to PJ Juvekar with Citi.
Just a quick question again on these co-products. You mentioned that there is no demand for co-products and prices are coming down. How would that change naphtha margins? And then can you compare current today's ethylene margins in U.S. versus Europe? You're in a good position to do that. And any thoughts on new China ethylene crackers that were coming online?
I think what we've seen so far, PJ, in terms of the cost curves on ethylene is that naphtha has come down, but lighter cracking ethane, propane cracking is still advantaged to $100 or maybe more than $100 a ton. And so that is a byproduct of the byproduct credits. And when you run these naphtha crackers, typically, market and net that back against the ethylene capacity. When there is no margin on the byproducts, there's no netback credits. And so that's what we're looking at is there's no place for the C4s to go, the butadiene demand is down, rubber demand is down. And so at some point, you flip those markets upside down. And at that point, people just slow down rather than crack more naphtha. So that's what we're looking at, and I think that's what we're going to see play out.
And we'll move to John McNulty with BMO Capital Markets.
On the cost side, can you speak to the $350 million cost asset that you're looking to pull out? How quickly that can be phased in? And then I guess also, in terms of the cost and efficiency improvements that you're looking for in Sadara, how can we be thinking about that playing through throughout the year as well and if that may be expedited in any way?
Yes. Let's -- Howard can put a good time frame to that.
Yes. Yes, John, on the $350 million, I would say, I would look at about 20% of that realized in the second quarter. And then the 80%, pretty evenly split between the third quarter and fourth quarter, maybe a little bit of a lighter third quarter and a heavier fourth quarter just as we continue to take those costs out.
Relative to Sadara, look, if these naphtha margins hold, you'll actually see a margin expansion in Sadara as the second quarter progresses. And then on the cost out, the team continues to do a good job of reducing costs pretty evenly through the year. In fact, if you looked at our equity earnings in the first quarter, it was the one JV that actually was flat or up on same quarter last year or prior quarter basis, and that's really because they saw the same thing that all of the other JVs saw, which was some margin compression because of the demand disruption, but they were able to offset that with the cost.
The other thing that they're also working on is just the sell up. Remember, we brought 26 unit operations on pretty much in about a 12-month period. So we sold them out, but now we've got to sell them up. And so the teams are working on that. That's not going to be a 1- or 2-quarter activity, but that's over the course of about 3 or 4 years.
And we'll move on to Frank Mitsch with Fermium Research.
And Jim, I'd like to echo your appreciation and congrats to Neal and offer a warm welcome to Colleen. So Dow has spoken in the past about multiple Monte Carlo simulations, and I'm not sure if you factored in a pandemic or oil collapse in those simulations. But here we are, if I'm looking at the first half of 2020, we're running at a run rate below $6 billion in EBITDA. So I guess my question is, at what level decline in profitability do you start to get concerned about the dividend? And if you could offer any comments regarding that, that would be very helpful.
Sure. Let me have Howard do that because he went through a tremendous amount of this work pre-spin as we came out of spin. Howard?
Yes, Frank. Look, we're really smart. I don't know that we factored in a pandemic into the Monte Carlo simulation. So let me use the current most bearish Wall Street number that's out there on our 2020 earnings, around $5.1 billion, $5.2 billion of EBITDA. If you take out interest and taxes, that leaves you with about $4 billion. And then from there, you've got a $2.1 billion dividend. You've got what we said today was $1.25 billion of CapEx and $500 million of Sadara. So you've got plenty of room even at that bearish number to do it just with operating earnings and more than cover the dividend.
We're also working on the nonoperating side of the house. So part of our cash flow in the first quarter was the $250 million that we got from the Nova judgment on the tax side. Obviously, if earnings are that kind of depressed and oil is down, we're going to see at least a $500 million release in cash on working capital. And then we've got some of the other nonoperating things that we're working on, which is the Olin payment that's expected and contractually obligated at the end of the year of about $500 million. So even at that level, we are more than comfortable and adequately able to cover that dividend. And we've got $12 billion of committed liquidity, including $3.6 billion of cash on hand.
And we'll move on to Chris Parkinson with Crdit Suisse.
Can you just walk us through your various Sadara assumptions just regarding the structural op improvements you referenced and just also update us on your debt re-profiling discussions?
Sure. Howard, do you want to hit Sadara, all of our assumptions and our debt re-profiling?
Yes. So look, I mean what we said in the prepared remarks this morning, we're very pleased that Sadara got that last remaining rail agreement, logistics agreement signed. That is the final substantive step to achieve PCD. Now we have a series of what I would call administrative steps that Sadara has got to work through, things like registration of their security documents for the lenders, verification of the project costs and some of those other things. Those should be well underway as we approach the end of the second quarter, if not completely done.
As a result of the logistics agreement being done, the Sadara, Saudi Aramco and Dow treasury teams have jointly begun the lender re-profiling discussions. In fact, those discussions got actively started this week. I would say for modeling purposes, it's going to take the balance of the year to make that happen. You've got ECAs in the mix, you've got sukuk financing and you've got international banks. So it's going to be a complicated discussion. That's why we say, look, $500 million of cash this year, in line with last year, makes sense from a modeling purpose standpoint. But we're pretty focused on making sure that we get that done by the end of the year. That is the goal.
And if you see, Chris, Sadara's first quarter results were relatively flat with last year. We're taking lots of actions, Sadara and Aramco and Dow, to make sure that they can continue to deliver performance similar to last year. And we put in the model $500 million, which is our contribution to repayment of principal for the year. So that's how much cash we'll be looking at putting in this year.
And we'll move on to Steve Byrne with Bank of America.
I wanted to drill in a little more on the $350 million of cost cuts. Can you describe what functional areas and businesses these came from? And perhaps, you can talk a little bit about the learnings from your benchmarking analysis. Any specific productivity initiatives that have come out of that?
Yes, Steve. So let me try to hit it and then ask Howard, if I miss anything, to come in. So it isn't -- I think most people will go to this and say that it's headcount-related. We have tried not to do that. Obviously, we've got almost all of our plants running today. So we're trying to support our customers. We are idling some capacity, but we aren't laying off people in order to do that. We've cut discretionary spend. And then obviously, big buckets of spend like travel and other things are near 0. And so there's been a shift in some of the spending. We've moved out some turnaround activity. That carries with it, obviously, some discretionary expense that goes along.
And so we've looked at different types of activities like that where we can cut discretionary spend out, and we've got that modeled out for the rest of the year. But we haven't -- given that this is a pandemic and one of the biggest challenges around the world has been -- the number of people that are unemployed, we have not tried to add to that because that's a burden right now for a lot of governments around the world.
We've also done a fair amount of digitalization as we brought the DuPont assets in and set up for regional back-office centers, one in China, one in the Netherlands, one in the U.S. here in Michigan, and then another in So Paulo. So we've been able to do a lot of streamlining as well.
And next, we'll move to Arun Viswanathan with RBC Capital Markets.
I guess I just wanted to ask about both polyethylene and polyurethanes. Both markets have gone through some structural changes here, polyethylene on the feedstock side and potentially demand side; polyurethanes on the demand side with maybe reduced demand for consumer discretionary items. I guess, would you agree with those characterizations? And I guess, when you think about that, thinking longer term, do you foresee any changes in your strategy? In polyurethanes, you've talked about adding systems houses and PE, you talked about selling up. Are those still valid in this environment? Have you seen new customers trade down or change their strategy as well?
Arun, I think we'll get back to the growth playbook, as we mentioned in the script. And I think it's just a matter of timing here. So it doesn't make sense right now to continue to plow cash and the capacity when the demand in Europe and North America and Latin America has slowed down because people are staying at home. So that's why we're taking some of the actions that we're taking right now, it's just to balance that demand. But that demand will come back. People are not going to stay at home forever. We're helping governments right now with safe ways to return to work. And we're operating safely 14,000 Dow people go to the sites every day, and we're operating safely and people are healthy.
So we know it can be done, but it's just going to take some time before the consumer confidence to come back. And that's why we're doing what we're doing. Downstream expansions in our Industrial Solutions and in our functional silicones products are still continuing. Systems house will come back as the automotive business and the installation and construction business comes back, and we'll continue to look at downstream on plastics.
And that will conclude today's question-and-answer session. At this time, I would like to turn the call back over to Colleen Kay for any additional or closing remarks.
Thank you, everyone, for joining our call today. We appreciate your interest in Dow. For your reference, a copy of our transcript will be posted on Dow's website within 24 hours. This concludes our call, and have a safe day.
And that will conclude today's call. We thank you for your participation. You may now disconnect.
Welcome to the IRadimed Corporation First Quarter 2020 Financial Results Conference Call. [Operator Instructions] As a reminder, this call is being recorded today, April 30, 2020, and contains time-sensitive information that is accurate only as of today.
Earlier, IRadimed released financial results for the first quarter 2020. A copy of this press release announcing the company's earnings is available under the heading News on their website at iradimed.com.
A copy of the press release will also be furnished to the Securities and Exchange Commission on Form 8-K and can be found at sec.gov. This call is being webcast live over the Internet on the company's website at iradimed.com, and a replay of the call will be available on the website for the next 90 days.
The agenda for today's call will be as follows: Leslie McDonnell, President and Chief Executive Officer of IRadimed, will present opening comments; then Chris Scott, IRadimed's Chief Financial Officer, will summarize the company's financial results before opening the call up to questions.
Some of the information to be furnished in today's session will constitute forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Forward-looking statements are those focused on the future performance results, plans and events and may include the company's expected results for 2020.
IRadimed reminds you that future results may differ materially from these forward-looking statements due to a number of risk factors. For a description of the relevant risks and uncertainties that may affect the company's business, please see the Risk Factors section of the company's most recent reports filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, which again may be obtained for -- on the SEC's website at sec.gov.
I would now like to turn the call over to Leslie McDonnell, President and Chief Executive Officer of IRadimed Corporation. Ms. McDonnell?
Thank you and good morning. Earlier today, we announced first quarter revenue of $8.7 million, which is an increase of 2.8% over the first quarter last year. We also reported GAAP net income of $0.14 per diluted share and non-GAAP net income of $0.18 per diluted share. These results were negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and similar to the current discussion being had across much of the of 2020.
Regarding our ability to sell our products in the current environment, much of the sales cycle for products recognized in revenue during the first quarter was completed in the fourth quarter 2019. Additionally, as we progress through the first quarter 2020 and the impact of COVID-19 continue to spread throughout the world, we experienced an acceleration in the decline of orders for our products as our customers focus their efforts on preparing for and treating those infected with the virus and deferring decisions to purchase our products into the future. Also during this time, many of our hospital customers began restricting access to health care workers only, diminishing our ability to generate sales, which may delay the timing of future orders.
We may be further impacted if hospitals choose to maintain their restrictions on hospital entrants and limit their capital spending plans until their operations have stabilized. So despite the significant uncertainties created by COVID-19, we believe that this is a shorter-term dynamic and that higher demand for our products will return.
During the quarter, there were several bright spots for us to focus on. The first is revenue from our international channels exceeded our initial forecast, and total international revenue grew almost 73% over the first quarter last year.
Second, we received COVID-related orders for our IV pumps for some customers because of its remote control capabilities and its use as the primary infusing device in an isolation room configuration. We're really proud to be able to contribute to the overall treatment efforts for this virus.
And third, revenue from sales of our IV sets also exceeded our initial forecast in part due to COVID-related demand. During the quarter, we learned that some customers were using one version of our IV tubing set to infuse patients located in an isolation room utilizing a pump that is positioned outside that room.
With the current shortages of critical care supplies, IRadimed wanted to do more to help health care providers combat the increased demands that COVID-19 has placed on them. So we are using our clean room and IV set manufacturing expertise to build standard extension tubing that can be substituted for any IV extension tubing our customers are having trouble finding. It is just a simple IV tube using the same quality materials and components we use in our regular tubing. And we expect sales of this new tubing to begin within the next few days.
During Q1, we filled key leadership roles in sales, regulatory affairs and quality assurance and R&D as part of succession planning and to continue building out our capabilities that will help support the growth we anticipate in the years ahead. We also continue making progress on our product road map and have not seen any significant changes to time lines at this point.
However, I will point out that there are steps in the new product testing phase that require the use of third parties. And given the stay-at-home restrictions implemented by many government authorities, there may be shifts to our original testing schedules.
Now from a supply chain standpoint, we are not experiencing any delays in obtaining the materials for our products at this time. Overall, we are experiencing significant changes to our business due to COVID. During this time, we are focusing on the things that we can control and continuing to make investments in the company that are supportive of its longer-term health with the goal of emerging from the pandemic even stronger.
In our efforts to manage through this environment, we are looking through 4 lenses. The first one is product innovation for future growth. As mentioned, we have recently filled key technical leadership roles and continue to make progress on our product road map.
The second one is serving our customers, whether through modifying a version of our IV tubing to facilitate infusions from outside an isolation room or supplying our IV pumps for its remote control capabilities or providing virtual product training. We stand ready to support our customers' delivery of critical care for COVID-19 patients.
The third lens is taking care of our employees. We have a highly trained workforce and have implemented several policies that support their health and well-being during this time. These range from enhanced cleaning procedures at our headquarters facility to remote working arrangements where feasible.
The fourth is cost containment. We've already taken several steps to contain costs, including implementing reduced hours in some departments and complying with travel and entry restrictions by our field sales and clinical support teams. We will continue to look through these 4 lenses as the situation develops, and we'll evaluate taking additional steps, if needed.
Now I'll turn it over to Chris to summarize the financial results.
Thank you and good morning. As always, I'll be discussing our financial results on a GAAP basis as well as on a non-GAAP basis. Our non-GAAP operating results exclude stock-based compensation expense and the related tax effects. Infrequent tax items are considered based on their nature and excluded from our provision for income taxes as these items are not indicative of our normal provision for income taxes. Free cash flow is cash flow from operations less cash used for purchases of property and equipment.
We believe the presentation of these non-GAAP measures, along with our GAAP financial statements, can be helpful in providing a more thorough analysis of our ongoing financial performance. You can find a reconciliation of these non-GAAP measures to the nearest GAAP measure on the last page of today's press release.
As we reported this morning, first quarter 2020 revenue increased 2.8% over the first quarter last year. Revenue from domestic sales decreased 10.6% to $6.3 million during the current quarter, while revenue from international sales increased 72.7% to $2.4 million for the current quarter. The decrease in domestic sales was primarily driven by lower pump sales, and the increase in international sales was driven by higher pump and monitor sales.
Revenue from sales of our devices decreased 6.8% to $5.6 million for the first quarter 2020. This decrease was driven by a 36.4% decline in IV pump revenue that was partially offset by a 63.5% increase in revenue from our monitoring systems. The average selling price of our MRI-compatible IV infusion pump system during the first quarter of 2020 was approximately $29,900 compared to approximately $35,800 for the same period in 2019.
The decrease in ASP relates to higher international sales of our infusion pumps recognized in revenue when compared to the first quarter last year. The average selling price of our MRI-compatible patient vital signs monitoring system during the first quarter 2020 was approximately $35,400 compared to approximately $37,400 for the same period in 2019. The decrease in ASP relates to higher international sales of our monitoring system recognized in revenue when compared to the first quarter last year.
Revenue from sales of our disposables, services and others increased by 30.7% to $2.7 million for the first quarter 2020 from $2 million for the same quarter in 2019. And lastly, revenue from the amortization of extended maintenance contracts increased 4.5% to $0.5 million for the current quarter.
Gross margin was 74.5% for the 2020 quarter and 75.7% for the 2019 quarter. The decrease in gross margin is a result of higher international sales as a percent of total revenue, partially offset by unfavorable inventory costing adjustments recognized during the first quarter last year.
Operating expenses were $5.7 million or 66% of revenue compared to $4.9 million or 57.8% of revenue for the first quarter last year. On a dollar basis, operating expenses increased due to higher expenses for payroll, benefits and stock compensation due to higher headcount, higher employee recruiting costs and higher legal and professional fees, partially offset by lower sales commissions.
Our effective tax rate for the 2020 quarter was negative 111.7% compared to negative 14.9% for the 2019 quarter. The lower effective tax rate is primarily due to discrete items related to stock compensation us to carry back our net operating loss to years prior to the enactment of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, which increased the benefit to the previously enacted federal tax rate of 35% versus the current federal tax rate of 21%.
Net income on a GAAP basis was $0.14 per diluted share for the first quarter 2020 compared to $0.15 for the 2019 quarter. On a non-GAAP basis, net income was $0.18 per diluted share for the current quarter compared to $0.13 for the first quarter last year.
From a cash flow perspective, we generated $1.2 million of cash from operations compared to $700,000 for the 2019 quarter. For the 3 months ended March 31, 2020, cash provided by operations was provided -- was positively impacted by cash inflows from accounts receivable and deferred revenue and negatively impacted by prepaid income taxes, inventory and accrued payroll and benefits.
For the 3 months ended March 31, 2020, and 2019, our free cash flow, a non-GAAP measure, was $1 million and $600,000, respectively. And lastly, we exited the quarter with a combined cash and investments balance of $47.4 million and no third-party debt or other restrictive covenants. And with that, I'll turn the call over for questions. Operator?
[Operator Instructions] Your first question is from Scott Henry with Roth Capital.
A couple of questions. I guess, first, just a big picture question. I recognize you don't want to give guidance, but can you talk qualitatively about how we should think about 2Q relative to 1Q given COVID-19?
Well, Scott, this is Leslie. I'll maybe start off by providing a little of that qualitative context for the kind of short to medium term, and then Chris can add to my comments.
When we think about how has that returned to growth, what's it going to look like, the time frames, which just happens, are going to be uncertain. But when we think about our portfolio, it really is well positioned with its remote capabilities, MRI safety and transportability. We have a nice mix of equipment and critical care disposables. We're geographically diversified, so in different countries around the world, recover from this pandemic at different rates. We will see benefit from that and be able to participate in that.
And probably finally, we believe the need to do MRIs on critical patients and those needing sedation will absolutely continue. In fact, there's accumulating evidence suggesting that patients with severe COVID-19 may be at risk for encephalopathy, which is actually causing an increase in critical care patients needing MRI exams. So these are just a few thoughts to kind of put some qualitative context around that path back to higher growth.
And I guess just to kind of follow up, and I know you don't want to get too granular, but I mean, is it reasonable to think of business being down 40% to 50% in 2Q? Just trying to get a sense of the magnitude.
And along that line, could you give me a sense of how your business typically performs? And if there's a recessionary environment, I would think it would be relatively defensive but curious of your take.
So Scott, I mean, I think you're hitting on a lot of the uncertainties that really caused us to withdraw our financial guidance in the beginning. And to Leslie's point, the duration that were impacted or the duration of the pandemic itself, when is the country going to reopen, how is that going to look, when are other countries going to reopen and how does that play out, I think there's a lot of the uncertainty exists around, and trying to quantify that is quite challenging at this point.
Could -- to your question, could revenue be down 50%? I'm assuming you're talking about 50% from the first quarter. That would put us somewhere around, I don't know, call it, $4.3 million, $4.4 million. And I mean my sense is that's a pretty drastic move but certainly not out of the realm of possibilities. But it's challenging trying to answer your question specifically.
Okay. No, Chris, that's actually really helpful. I appreciate just kind of the context behind that. And then I just want to ask, in first quarter, the monitor sales were very strong relative to expectations. I mean they were strong in Q4. Typically Q1, maybe we drop back down, but it was a really solid number, particularly given the background. But then pumps got hit a little more, which -- not totally unexpected. But can you talk a little bit about those trends between the strong monitor sales and a little more weakness in the pump sales in Q1?
I think part of this goes back to just our international channel performed very well with both pumps and monitors. Domestically, we struggled a little bit more on the pump side than, I would say, when compared to compared to the international side. But I think part of this goes to how the hospital restrictions were rolled out.
The March -- or I would say the third month in every quarter is always the most important month for us when it comes to bookings. And for -- really, we started to see restrictions on our ability to access hospitals in mid- to late February, where those rumors were starting to float around and isolated instances of hospitals really shutting their doors to vendors. And then, of course, as we progressed throughout the month of March, that really became the norm. And it impacted our ability domestically.
So I can't -- there wasn't anything out of the ordinary related to pumps, but other than the impact from COVID and hard to put a finger on anything else other than COVID.
Okay. Great. And just a final question, just -- can you just clarify? It looks like the tax gain in was not excluded from non-GAAP EPS. Is that correct?
That's right.
It wasn't -- meaning it wasn't pulled out?
It wasn't pulled out. That's right.
The next question is from Lisa Springer with Singular Research.
During your remarks, you mentioned that COVID-related orders for IV sets. I was wondering if you could -- do you have a sense of how much of the increase in disposables was related to COVID-19 type demand?
So Lisa, this is Leslie McDonnell. We're not -- we don't have a good enough sense of that to be able to break that out. We saw the biggest surge in the IV set business in what we call our extension type set. Now those are typically used in critical care environments. So I think there was definitely a positive impact from customers buying ahead as well as seeing an opportunity to use that tubing for patients who were in isolation room settings, and they wanted to control the pump from outside that room.
Okay. And you also do -- in your remarks, you mentioned cost containment is one of your -- the legs of the company going into 2020. Could you give us a little more detail around what areas you might be looking at? And have you set specific goals for cost containment?
Well, I think at this point, we're looking at a lot of things. We've taken some steps already regarding reducing hours, where possible, restricting travel, things like that. We're sort of play-booking a lot of different options. But at this point, it's too early to carry out any of those plans so soon.
Okay. And do you have any sense in terms of the mix between domestic versus international going into the second quarter? Is it going to be stronger internationally again? Or do you have a sense of that?
I mean, Lisa, I think that really will depend on how fast the U.S. hospitals open up to manufacturing partners coming in, in supporting them. It's -- we're seeing into that, reports of that in different places in the United States. It's kind of hard to gauge that relative to the pace of recovery in other countries. I think our international business will continue to stay strong. The comment I made before about that geographically diversified revenue base, I think it's going to play in our favor because of all that uncertainty.
At this time, there are no further questions. I'll hand the call over to Ms. McDonnell.
I would like to thank everyone for listening and participating in the call. These are unpredictable times, and we are taking steps that come out of this pandemic stronger than ever. To manage through this, we are focusing on the things in our control and being vigilant in the areas of product innovation, serving our customers, taking care of our employees and assessing the impact of COVID on our cost structure. Wishing you all continued good health, and we look forward to speaking with you again after Q2.
Thank you. This concludes the call. You may now disconnect.
Good day, and welcome to the Jaguar Health Investor Call. Today's conference is being recorded.
Before I turn the call over to management, I'd like to remind you that management may make forward- looking statements relating to such matters as continued growth prospects for the company, uncertainties regarding market acceptance of products, the impact of competitive products and pricing, industry trends and product and technology initiatives, including products in the development stage, which may not achieve scientific objectives or meet stringent regulatory requirements. Forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those contemplated in such forward-looking statements. These statements are based on currently available information and management's current assumptions, expectations and projections about future events. While management believes that its assumptions, expectations and projections are reasonable in view of currently available information, you are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements.
The company's actual results may differ materially from those discussed in this call for a variety of reasons, including those described in the forward-looking statements and Risk Factor sections of the company's Form 10-K for the year ending December 31, 2019, which was filed on April 3, 2020, and its other filings with the SEC, which are available on the Investor Relations section of Jaguar's website. Except as required by law, Jaguar Health undertakes no obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements contained in this presentation to reflect new information, future events or otherwise.
Additionally, please note that the company supplements its condensed consolidated financial statements presented on a GAAP basis by providing gross sales, non-GAAP EBITDA and non-GAAP recurring EBITDA. Jaguar believes that the disclosure items of these non-GAAP measures provide investors with additional information that reflects the basis upon which company management assesses and operates the business. These non-GAAP financial measures should not be viewed in isolation or as substitutes for GAAP net sales and GAAP net loss and are not substitutes for or superior to measures of financial performance in conformity with GAAP.
At this time, it's my pleasure to turn the call over to Lisa Conte, Jaguar Health's President and Chief Executive Officer. Lisa, the floor is yours.
Thank you -- thank you very much. We thank you all, who are on the phone, very much for joining our call today. My name is Lisa Conte. I am the founder and CEO of Jaguar Health and our wholly owned subsidiary, Napo Pharmaceuticals. I may use the name, Napo and Jaguar interchangeably throughout this call.
First, I, of course, want to send my warmest wishes to everyone as we all navigate through these unprecedented times. We feel grateful to report that everyone at Jaguar and Napo are fine. We are all stuck at home, doing this call remotely. And as such, we will not be taking Q&A today. 1/3 of company has been together for over 10 to 25 years, 3 of us have been working together for over 30 years. That trusted familiarity and continuity allow us to work well together even when working remotely. Now we literally finish each other during sentences.
Thirty years ago, we were in the middle of another pandemic, HIV/AIDS. And for Napo, we were on a mission to find naturally sourced plant-based medicines to meet urgent global health needs. We successfully brought Mytesi from a tree that we would possibly harvest from the Amazon rainforest to the first and only oral plant-based prescription medicine approved under botanical guidance by the FDA. Today, we find ourselves in the middle of the COVID-19 pandemic, working with the FDA to determine if
Mytesi may be appropriate for emergency use authorization for symptomatic relief of diarrhea in patients with COVID-19.
Nearly 38 million people with HIV globally and nearly 25 million people use antiretroviral therapy based on data from UNAIDS at the end of June 2019. As a reminder, Mytesi is a first-in-class antisecretory agent, currently FDA-approved for the indication of symptomatic relief of noninfectious diarrhea in adult patients with HIV/AIDS on antiretroviral therapy.
We have an essential product with Mytesi, we're in essential business, and we'd anticipate stocked up and taking steps to ensure that patients living with HIV, who rely on Mytesi, have uninterrupted access to this first of its kind oral plant-based prescription medicine.
Mytesi, as we said before, is a product in the pipeline. We're actively developing multiple potential follow- on pipeline indications focused on GI indication, the most advanced being cancer therapy-related diarrhea, which we refer to as CTD. Other potential GI indications include irritable bowel syndrome, inflammatory bowel disease and Crohn's supportive care, functional diarrhea and pediatric rare gastrointestinal disease indications.
There are 5 primary topics we'll be covering for today's call with 5 participating speakers from the company, the same speakers.
I'll begin with a status update regarding our ongoing business development efforts and provide an update on COVID-19-related activities. Next, I'll turn the discussion over to our Senior VP of Finance and Chief Accounting Officer, Carol Lizak, who will recap financials for 2019 and provide a comparison to 2018. After Carol, we'll introduce Ian Wendt, our Vice President of Commercial Strategy. Ian will discuss the multiple facets of Napo's enhanced market access strategy for Mytesi for the currently approved indication of HIV- related diarrhea, which is an initiative we're quite excited about and occurring real time.
Dr. Steven King, our Chief of Ethnobotanical Science and also the project leader of our cholera development program, will provide information regarding recently approved funding support from the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases in support of the cholera program moving forward. Steve will also discuss the role that traditional medicine has played and potentially is currently playing in the fight against global pathogen scourges.
And finally, Dr. Pravin Chaturvedi, our Scientific Officer, will speak to the regulatory developments related to crofelemer for the potential CTD indication and potential pediatric rare disease indication for congenital diarrheal disorder and short bowel syndrome.
Let's jump right in. Looking forward, we believe 2020 has the potential to be a transformative year for Jaguar and Napo. Our core goals for 2020 include initiating the pivotal trial in the second half of this year for Mytesi for CTD, cancer therapy-related diarrhea, and completing the rollout of our enhanced market especially during this time of global crisis.
The majority of people living with HIV/AIDS in the United States are older. As Tez Anderson, the founder of the nonprofit organization, Let's Kick ASS - AIDS Survivor Syndrome, pointed out to me recently, it's not our first pandemic, Lisa. The community is resilient as is Napo, and we believe our enhanced patient access plan will help expand Mytesi access among HIV patients, which you'll hear more about from Ian.
Key to our business model, this sustainable-based commercial business efforts supports the company's strategy to become a stable, cash flow positive business, supported primarily by growth in Mytesi sales. Simultaneously, and as I stated before, we are confident that by mid-2020, we'll forge a regional ex U.S. business development deal, possibly more than 1, to bring in nondilutive dollars to support the pivotal trial initiation and/or key clinical development activities for pipeline follow-on indications for Mytesi.
Our mantra at Napo is pipeline, pipeline, pipeline driven by business development, business development, business development for that pipeline mobilization. We have a remarkable risk-mitigated product pipeline, a pipeline within a product, I can't say that enough, which contains multiple, novel and important follow-on indications for Mytesi. Let me remind you, it's a drug product that is already approved by the FDA for chronic indication and, therefore, supported by chronic safety package, GMP, commercial manufacturing is in place for Mytesi and several of the follow-on indications for Mytesi are backed by strong Phase II and/or proof-of-concept data.
The depth of our pipeline provides potential supportive care solutions for a large patient population across multiple disease indications around the globe. And we believe this pipeline will fuel long-term value creation for investors and provide nondiluted funding opportunities for partner collaborations around the world.
Diarrhea related to cancer therapy continues to be the core focus of our pipeline development efforts. A significant portion of patients undergoing cancer treatment experience diarrhea. Novel targeted cancer therapy agents, such as epidermal growth factor receptor antibodies, Herceptin, for example, and tyrosine kinase inhibitors, Herceptin, for -- I am sorry, anyways, tyrosine kinase inhibitors with or without standard chemotherapy agents may activate natural chloride secretion pathways in the gastrointestinal mucosa, potentially leading to secretory diarrhea.
According to data appearing in treatment guidelines for CID, which stands for chemotherapy-induced diarrhea, a component of CTD, and this was in the April 2004 issue of Gastroenterology & Endoscopy News, diarrhea is the most common adverse event reported in chemotherapy patients. Diarrhea in this patient population has a potential to cause dehydration. OTC, antimotility agents, such as the opioids, Imodium or loperamide, cause constipation and lethargy. And many cancer patients with diarrhea require drug holidays or dose reductions in their life-saving cancer therapy.
Better management of diarrhea allows for better -- potentially allows for better compliance with the therapeutic dosing of targeted treatments for cancer. And as we've shown in relevant animal models, potentially leading to better clinical outcomes for cancer patients, and in particular, for cancer patients on long-term adjuvant therapy.
To continue, I want to mention our efforts to make Mytesi available for supportive care related to COVID-19. We submitted an emergency release authorization request on March 21, 2020. The request was based on and accompanied by a letter of endorsement submitted to Dr. Janet Woodcock, Director of the FDA's Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, and CC to FDA Commissioner, Dr. Stephen Hahn, from a world leader in the field of infectious diseases and epidemiology.
The letter of endorsement is based on information and publications with key opinion leaders has been reviewing real time, which indicates that there is adequate information to document that diarrhea and other gastrointestinal symptoms are early symptoms of COVID-19 prior to the pulmonary symptoms. His review of data also supports the tenets that the virus can be shed from the dress and is thus potentially transmissible via the fecal-oral route. Decreasing fecal volume by changing the stool consistency from watery to formed stool is key to the mechanism of action and the results of Mytesi would not only support patient's care, but could thus also reduce the contagion risk to health care providers.
As we've heard from the FDA, they expect to get back to us in days with respect to this potential off-label use of Mytesi. We're so pleased to have the FDA's attention for a request to provide possible support to COVID-19 patients and potentially reduce contagion among patients and health care workers. And we're grateful to and proud of the many Napo stakeholders that have taken the initiatives and perseverance in the time to chaos to play a meaningful role in seeking to address the weak during this pandemic.
Back to our major core business. We'll now move along to the 2019 financial results. The company filed its 2019 10-K on Friday, April 3, with the SEC. The 10-K can, of course, be viewed on the SEC's website and on the Investor Relations section of the Jaguar website.
I'll now turn the call over to Carol Lizak, Jaguar's Senior Vice President and Chief Accounting Officer, to review top line financial results for the year ended December 31, 2019. Carol?
Thank you, Lisa, and thank you all for joining our call today.
Key financial highlights for the year ended December 31, 2019, are as follows: 2019 Mytesi net sales were approximately $5.7 million, an increase of 36% in year-over-year. The Mytesi total prescription volume increased to 62% in the year 2019 over the year 2018. The total operating expenses for the year 2019 was $34.7 million as compared to $35.2 million for the year 2018, a 1% or $500,000 decrease year- over-year. The decrease in total operating expenses was primarily due to the write-off of goodwill of $5.2 million in the year 2018, offset by an impairment of long-lived intangible assets of $4 million and $600,000 in the settlement of the royalty license agreement.
That concludes my recap of high-level financials for 2019. I'll now hand the discussion over to our next speaker, Ian Wendt.
Good morning, all. As Lisa stated in her opening comments and as the company announced last week, Napo is expanding NapoCares, our patient support program for Mytesi, the company's FDA-approved plant-based prescription drug indicated for the symptomatic relief of noninfectious diarrhea in adult patients living with HIV on any retroviral therapy.
The changes to the NapoCares program are intended to increase Mytesi patient access, uptake and persistency. HIV enteropathy, which is chronic diarrhea due to the direct or indirect effects of HIV on the GI tract is a problem for many HIV positive patients.
Unlike certain antidiarrheal products that are only approved for acute use, Mytesi is a nonopioid derivative and has a very low-risk of causing constipation. Mytesi is approved for chronic use and its unique mechanism of action helps ensure that diarrhea does not have to become the new normal for adult patients living with HIV on any retroviral therapy.
Our field team's efforts remain focused primarily on physicians who are already writing Mytesi prescriptions, on alleviating access issues faced by patients and on increasing the duration of Mytesi therapy in HIV patients is clinically appropriate, while also reducing Mytesi-related cost burdens in non- government supported payer channels.
The expansion to the NapoCares program raises income limits on patients eligible for Napo's uninsured free drug program, significantly increases co-pay support for commercially insured patients and allows the co-pay amount to remain the same whether a patient fills a 30-day or 90-day prescription of Mytesi. These changes became effective on April 1.
A key component of the NapoCares market access program involves offering significantly expanded support for eligible patients to reduce out-of-pocket cost as a barrier to obtaining Mytesi in the U.S. The income limit for the patient assistance program, which offers free drug for uninsured patients, had increased from 2x the federal poverty limit to 5x the federal poverty limit, a 150% increase, and the
Mytesi co-pay benefit for commercially insured patients has been increased from an annual maximum of $1,200 to $6,000, which is a 400% increase. Most eligible patients will now pay no more than $25 for their Mytesi prescription. Additionally, patients can now use their co-pay cards if they refill Mytesi prescriptions earlier and every 30 days. Fast-start prescriptions will soon be available to provide immediate access to Mytesi for patients facing reimbursement challenges, and a bridge drug program will soon be available for patients who have a lapse in insurance coverage.
To support providers, patients with access services from reimbursement and prior authorization support to appeals and patient assistance dispensing for Mytesi, Napo is working with Florida-based AssistRx to design and implement a comprehensive patient support services program. AssistRx has extensive experience supporting HIV patients and has developed an industry-leading technology platform called iAssist to streamline therapy initiation.
Our new market action strategy is also designed to significantly increase the number of specialty pharmacies involved in Mytesi's distribution. Specialty pharmacies offer a high-touch patient engagement model to help ensure appropriate use of drugs like Mytesi and optimal patient outcomes. The fact that our expanded patient support program is launching during the COVID-19 pandemic should especially benefit Mytesi patients who may have lost jobs or health insurance during the crisis.
We are removing barriers for patients to access Mytesi, and the changes we've instituted should help ensure patients can employ good social distancing practices while still obtaining their medication.
Diarrhea is a chronic life-altering condition in HIV patients on ART, and it's our goal to remove Mytesi access hurdles for all patients in need, regardless of their income level as well as for their providers, especially during this national crisis.
That concludes my comments for today. Steve, I will now turn the discussion over to you.
Thank you, Ian. And thanks for those of you on the phone to make time to join us this morning. My name is Steven King. I'm the Chief Sustainable Supply, Ethnobotanical Research & Intellectual Property Officer for Jaguar and Napo.
To begin, I'm happy to report that Napo was informed last week, on April 1 that it received additional preclinical services from the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases to support the development of lechlemer, Napo's growth product candidate for cholera indication.
Under NIAID's suite of preclinical services, NIAID-funded contractors will conduct toxicology testing for a 28-day rat study. NIAID is part of the National Institute of Health.
As previously announced under NIAID's suite of preclinical services, these NIAID-funded contractors conducted toxicology testing for a 7-day rat and dog study.
Cholera is an acute diarrheal illness caused by the infection of the intestine with the bacterium Vibrio cholerae. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, an estimated 3 million to 5 million cholera cases and more than 100,000 cholera- related deaths occur each year around the world. The deaths are due to dehydration, not the cholera infection itself. It simply occurs in the first 2 to 18 hours after the infection.
Lechlemer, which we also refer to as SB-300, has the same mechanism of action as crofelemer and is significantly less costly to produce. We have previously presented Phase II data on crofelemer for the treatment of the devastating diarrhea in cholera patients from the renowned International Center for Diarrhoeal Disease Research in Dhaka, Bangladesh.
Until permitted, we plan to follow the same study design for lechlemer, following the same protocol, using the same principle investigators and using the same clinical trial sites in Bangladesh for the development voucher from the FDA for cholera indication. Priority review vouchers are granted by the FDA to drug developers as an incentive to develop treatments for neglected diseases and rare pediatric diseases.
As many of you are no doubt aware, Napo's mission dating back to the company's founding is to discover and develop novel, safe and effective plant-based prescription medicines that can be responsibly harvested to meet urgent global health care needs.
Crofelemer, the active ingredient in Mytesi, our FDA-approved nonopioid prescription drug indicated for the symptomatic relief of noninfectious diarrhea in adult patients living with HIV on antiretroviral therapy is extracted and purified from the Amazon rainforest tree, Croton lechleri. The latex of the Croton lechleri tree has a rich history of medicinal use by indigenous people in South America.
At present, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, there is a great deal of information from global media related to another plant-based medicine, one that's changed the world a long time ago. The medicine I'm referring to is quinine, which was discovered originally by the Quechua people of Ecuador, Peru and Bolivia, who used the bark of the Amazonian tree, Cinchona officinalis, to treat fevers, inflammation and pain.
Other explorers from South America learned about quinine's additional properties in the beginning of the 17th century. Quinine remains an important anti-malarial drug almost 400 years after its effectiveness was first documented. Quinine and quinidine are still FDA-approved drugs used to treat cardiac disorders, digestive problems and muscle spasms. Quinine came to the world as malarial treatment that allowed European nations to develop and explore across the region that have been devastated by uncontrolled malaria.
The synthetic derivatives of quinine, Atabrine and chloroquine were developed between 1931 and 1934 to prevent and treat malaria before and after World War II. Chloroquine and another synthetic derivative, hydroxychloroquine are also used today to treat rheumatoid arthritis and lupus. There is now medical research focusing on the potential to use these 2 synthetic derivatives of quinine to combat COVID-19. It's not clear if these drugs will prove to be safe and/or effective for COVID-19, but I believe it's worth remembering that the medical practice in discovery of new therapeutics has used methods of medical knowledge in diseased people and the vast data used for centuries as part of their traditional medicine.
In fact, as an interesting historical footnote, Winston Churchill reportedly once have said that the gin and tonic saved more Englishmen's lives, and minds, than all the doctors in the Empire. The so-called tonic in the original gin and tonic was quinine.
I'm very proud of the fact that Mytesi also has its roots in traditional medicine, and I'm proud that Mytesi, as a pipeline in a product, a term frequently employed by Lisa, is being developed as multiple possible follow-on indications.
With Napo's daring commitment for development and commercializing traditional plant-based medicines, we expect that it won't be another 100 years before they're once again made aware of the reason of conserving and leveraging traditional medical knowledge. Pravin, onto you.
Thank you, Steve. Good morning, everybody. Thanks for joining. And my name is Pravin Chaturvedi, and I'm the Chair of Napo Scientific Advisory Board and also serve as the Chief Scientific Officer of Napo Pharmaceuticals and Jaguar Health.
As Lisa mentioned earlier, Napo is planning the initiation of preclinical trials for crofelemer in the second half of 2020, a pivotal trial for the indication of prevention and treatment of cancer therapy-related diarrhea, called CTD, in adult cancer patients, a target indication we refer to as CTD and 2 pediatric studies for diarrheal disease, orphan gastrointestinal disorder such as short bowel syndrome, I'll refer to it as SBS, these are being planned.
For the adult CTD study, we have been in active discussions with the FDA and with key opinion leaders, clinical protocol to accommodate their input and are preparing the requisite documents, including the statistical analysis plan based on consent and other requirements to initiate the pivotal adult CTD trials under a new IND. The principal investigator for the CTD trial is at a major institution -- major cancer institution in the United States.
Our goal is to ensure that the protocol addresses the unmet medical need for the treatment of CTD combined with the practicality of patients enrollment and trial design. But we are also ensuring that statisticians from both Napo Pharmaceuticals and the FDA agree on the endpoint that are relevant to crofelemer's unique physiological mechanism of action.
Our planned study for CTD is analogous to the successful pivotal trial for Mytesi's currently-approved HIV indication, and as a part of our risk mitigation strategy, we intend to use the same formulation and dosing as the currently commercialized Mytesi.
In addition to working with the key opinion leaders on clinical strategy and trial design, we've been coordinating with the Multinational Association of Supportive Care in Cancer, also referred to as MASCC. We are supporting their efforts to ascertain guidelines for the treatment and management of diarrhea in cancer patients. We are a Gold Level sponsor for the MASCC Conference, which was to be held in Spain in June this year. However, it has been postponed for obvious reasons at this time. However, we'll continue to work with the leadership team of MASCC and provide them a good support, while we all work through the challenges of this global pandemic.
For the pediatric clinical study in the orphan indication of short bowl syndrome, we prepared a dossier to support the pre-IND discussion with the FDA. And we've submitted it, and we expect the FDA to revert to us in approximately 30 days with their input on the pre-IND package. This pre-IND releasing document from Napo outlines the plan for clinical trial in short bowl syndrome and potentially -- and congenital diarrheal disorders as well as provide the rationale for addressing diarrhea to reduce the nutritional requirements in children with either short bowel syndrome or congenital diarrheal disorders. SBS and CDD, short bowel syndrome and congenital diarrheal disorders are much more prevalent in regions such as the Middle East and North Africa region, the MENA region, where there are consanguineous marriages. And we are pleased to actually have the support of the key opinion leader in that region, Dr. Mohamad Miqdady, from the Sheikh Khalifa Medical Center in Abu Dhabi, who's providing us with the leadership and guidance to conduct appropriate clinical studies in the MENA region.
As mentioned earlier, reduction of enteral and/or parenteral nutritional requirements in these children with SBS or congenital diarrheal disorders would improve both the quality of their lives as well as improve the odds of their survival. Hence, we are planning for potentially doing 2 pediatric clinical studies that will provide evidence of safety of Mytesi as well as proof of efficacy in SBS and/or CDD patients.
I will now pass the microphone back on to Lisa for her comments -- closing comments. Thank you. Over to you, Lisa.
Thanks, Pravin. Thank you to all the speakers, and thank you to all the listeners.
In closing, I'm proud to announce this past February, the nonprofit American Botanical Council has given the 2019 Varro E. Tyler Commercial Investment in Phytomedicinal Research Award to Napo in recognition of Napo's ongoing commitment to the sustainable development and production of natural therapeutic preparation. We had to miss that award ceremony for obvious reasons as well. Specifically, this award acknowledges the successful development and approval of crofelemer, which is derived as Steve said, from the traditional Croton lechleri tree in the Amazon rainforest. The development of crofelemer has been the key mission of Napo's core team members for more than 30 years, and we remain fully committed to expanding crofelemer access to all patients in need throughout the world.
Previous recipients of this award include our partner, Italian-based Indena, one of the world's largest producers of clinically-tested botanical extracts for the pharmaceutical market.
As a reminder, Mytesi is the first and only oral plant-based prescription medicine drug approved under FDA's botanical guidance. And there's no pathway by which a generic product can be developed for a drug approved under botanical guidance.
I'm extremely pleased with our achievements in 2019 and continue to be grateful for the ongoing support and dedication of our employees, stockholders and all of our stakeholders as we continue efforts in 2020 to grow sales, bring on more partners across multiple possible follow-on indications to Mytesi and drive this company to a break-even cash flow positive situation.
I'm also very proud to be working with the team with such high integrity and value, which has been displayed probably during this time of global crisis. I'll repeat the words of Tez Anderson. This is not our first pandemic, Lisa. And we are grateful to be working together to make a difference in the lives of people living with chronic life-altering GI conditions.
As I said earlier, we believe 2020 has the potential to be a transformative year for Jaguar and Napo.
With that, we conclude our comments. Thank you all once again for joining today's call. Please be safe, be well and stay home. Thank you.
And that does conclude today's conference. Again, thank you for your participation.
Good morning, and welcome to the Levi Strauss & Co. First Quarter 2020 Earnings Conference Call. My name is May, and I will be facilitating the audio portion of today's interactive broadcast. [Operator Instructions]
At this time, I would like to turn the call over to Ms. Aida Orphan, Senior Director, Investor Relations. Ma'am, please go ahead.
Thank you for joining us on the call today to discuss the results for our fiscal -- first fiscal quarter of 2020. Joining me on today's call are Chip Bergh, President and CEO of Levi Strauss; and Harmit Singh, our Executive Vice President and CFO. We have posted complete Q1 financial results in our earnings release on our IR section of our website, investors.levistrauss.com. The link to the webcast of today's conference call can also be found on our site.
We'd like to remind everyone that we'll be making forward-looking statements on this call, which involve risks and uncertainties. In particular, at this time, the COVID-19 pandemic is having a significant impact on the company's business, financial condition, cash flow and results of operations. There is significant uncertainty about the duration and extent of the impact of this pandemic. The dynamic nature of these circumstances means that what is said on this call could change materially at any time, and that actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by our forward-looking statements. Reported results should not be considered as an indication of future performance. Please review our filings with the SEC, in particular, the Risk Factors section of the quarterly report on Form 10-Q that we filed today for a discussion of the factors that could cause our results to differ. Also note that the forward-looking statements on this call are based on information available to us as of today's date. We disclaim any obligation to update any forward-looking statements except as required by law.
During this call, we will discuss certain non-GAAP financial measures. Reconciliations to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures are provided in the earnings release on our IR website. These non- GAAP measures are not intended to be a substitute for our GAAP results.
Finally, this call in its entirety is being webcast on our IR website, and a replay of this call will be available on the website shortly.
And with that, I'll go ahead and turn it over to Chip Bergh.
Thanks, Aida. Good afternoon, everyone, and thank you for joining our Q1 earnings call, which will be unlike most typical quarterly earnings calls, as while we will cover Q1 results, we'll focus more on updating you on where we are with the crisis at hand and how we are navigating the uncertainty that we're all facing. What is happening in the world around us is not just a human tragedy, but will likely result in a significant global economic tragedy. The biggest challenge we're all dealing with right now is uncertainty. How long will this continue? How deep of an economic crisis does the pandemic create? How will the consumer respond when the crisis abates? And ultimately, what is the shape, size and scope of the apparel sector when it's over? Frankly, trying to forecast this is nearly impossible. No one can control the virus or even the economic fallout, but we can control how we react to the crisis. I am very optimistic about our prospects for the future, both navigating through the crisis in the short to medium term and in the long term recovery, and I believe we are well positioned, if not better positioned than most companies, in our industry.
We had a great first quarter. Our business was humming coming into the crisis, again, reaffirming the robust strategies that we are executing and the momentum we had prior to the crisis erupting globally. But beyond the strength of our business and the underlying momentum, here is why I'm confident that we will emerge stronger on the other side. We have one of the world's most iconic, most loved brands in Levi's, and consumers will come back to brands that they love and trust. We haven't gone dark either. We're investing in strengthening our bond with our fans during these moments of isolation. We have a strong balance sheet and $1.8 billion of liquidity. We have an experienced management team that has a track record of making tough choices to cut costs, just as we did back in 2013, 2014. We've aggressively cut costs before, and we're on it now. Inventories are down and a significant majority of our inventory is core replenishment, which can be carried over to future seasons. We're focused on innovation. F.L.X. will be an advantage during this time as we'll be able to bring newness when stores reopen, regardless of when that is. And the innovation over the last month, leveraging digital tools throughout this organization, has been awesome.
Our strategy to diversify the business, which we've been executing now for years, makes us less vulnerable to the shocks that may be felt in some countries and channels. Our DTC business is now more than 40% of our total business, up from under 30% 5 years ago. Our e-commerce business has more than doubled in the last 5 years and is our fastest-growing business. Finally, we have something nobody else in this industry can claim, a company history of 167 years. We've been through other crises, some perhaps even more existential than what we're currently facing. We've seen it all, the Great Depression, 2 World Wars, earthquakes, fires and, yes, even the 1918 flu pandemic. Not only did we pull-through all of these, we use crisis to galvanize the path forward, and we will do it again. I also believe that crisis presents opportunities, and we will be ready to act on those that make good strategic sense, whether that's taking back underperforming franchise businesses or upgrading real estate locations because of other retailer bankruptcies or finding great talent in a decimated job market. The crisis gives us an opportunity to not just renew the business, but to reset it for the future.
Net, we are not managing through the crisis by playing defense. We will play to our strengths, leveraging the strength of the brand, our connection with our fans and the digital capabilities and omnichannel capabilities that we've invested in over the last few years. At the same time, we don't have our head in the sand. We will also be aggressive on cost takeout in light of the impact that the crisis will have on revenue and our structural economics, but we will be deliberate and thoughtful about how we do this, so we don't cut core capabilities and the things that have created our success over the last few years.
Let me give you a little more color on a few of these areas. First, we are very focused on engaging with our fans during their isolation, cultivating a deeper love for the Levi's brand. Just when the music festival season was supposed to start, all festivals have been canceled or postponed. To help fill the void, we launched a month-long virtual music festival with our Instagram Live 5:01 concert series. Each week night at 5:01 PM, artists such as Snoop Dogg and Brett Young are performing live in their Levi's, connecting this series has been so extremely positive, and we're finding more users are viewing these live sessions every day. This is something that is authentic. Truly something only Levi's could do. We're also replicating digital strategies that worked in China during and after their lockdown by featuring do-it-yourself content on our website that inspires our fans to customize their Levi's products at home.
Second, we're pivoting our marketing approach in response to the current environment. For example, our recently launched Super Mario collaboration with Nintendo is flying off the shelves in China, and it's also resonating in our e-commerce sites in Europe because we built excitement and demand through social media campaigns. The Super Mario collection will be dropping in the U.S. later this week. People are looking to connect these days, and Super Mario puts a smile on everyone's face.
Third, as you know, we recently launched the Levi's brand mobile app, and we're building loyalty with fans around the world, giving them another way to engage with the brand and another option for them to shop in whatever format they prefer. We've seen early success with strong consumer acquisition and enrollment rates and monthly engagement with exclusive product offerings, like the recent launch of our authorized vintage collection, which has been selling through very well. We will continue to scale and ramp our loyalty program and the app throughout this year.
The culture of innovation deeply embedded at LS&Co. is helping us evolve how we're working internally as a team and with our customers during this crisis. For example, we've accelerated the rollout of new technology we developed in our Eureka Innovation Lab, photorealistic 3D renderings of denim garments and samples. This allows us to digitize the sampling process, enabling us to sell to merchants from images rather than requiring physical samples. We leveraged this technology recently in our most recent line assortment meeting. Normally, this meeting brings around 100 merchants and marketers to our San Francisco headquarters from around the world, and is followed by cascading meetings over multiple weeks as they engage with their regional and local counterparts. By leveraging this digital technology to hold the meeting virtually, we were able to engage everyone simultaneously and complete this process in one meeting, taking weeks out of our go-to-market cycle. The feedback was that this may have been the best assortment meeting ever, and we may never go back to live meetings. This technology and others like it will drive efficiency, speed to market and reduce waste, while improving our operations through and beyond the crisis.
Finally, as we navigate this time of crisis, we will continue to be guided by our values and long-standing commitment to profits through principles. Supporting our communities through tough challenges is nothing new to LS&Co. We have a legacy of leadership and of doing the right thing, and we're taking steps to fulfill that responsibility again. Our response to the COVID-19 impact will evolve as the crisis continues to play out. But to start with, we've announced a $3 million philanthropic program in partnership with the Levi Strauss Foundation, and we're working with the foundation to launch a 3:1 matching campaign for our employees' donations to community groups, stepping up to meet local needs and organizations supporting COVID-19 efforts, from ensuring out-of-school students still have access to meals, to delivering needed supplies to homebound senior citizens. Additionally, the Red Tab Foundation, which supports our employees and retirees with short-term grants to help them get through trying times, is expanding its efforts.
Harmit will review the aggressive cost actions we're taking in light of this situation, but I want to cover the compensation and furlough-related announcements we're making today. Our Board members will forego their cash compensation, and we're announcing broad salary cuts for executives and leaders across the organization, including 50% from me. And effective April 13, we're furloughing all U.S. hourly retail employees and our wholesale merchandise coordinators.
In closing, I will say again, while this will be a challenging time with significant uncertainty, we will be laser-focused on what's within our control to mitigate the impact to the degree possible as the world grapples with the virus and the economic fallout.
We have many strengths on our side that I'm confident will bring us through the current environment: an iconic and beloved Levi's brand that has never been stronger; a solid balance sheet; a skilled, dedicated and courageous leadership team that will take aggressive action on costs; a culture of innovation and strategies that have transformed the business over the last 8 years that will help us chart our course through the coming months. We're taking swift and decisive action to ensure we remain a winner in our industry, and that we emerge from the storm as strong or stronger than going into it. The true character of a company is shown in a time of crisis, and as we have in the past, we will navigate this one by leveraging our strengths and seizing opportunities that will help us continue to thrive over the long term.
I'll now turn it over to Harmit to walk through the quarter in further detail. Harmit?
Thank you, Chip. Good afternoon to all of you. I hope all of you, your families and loved ones are safe and healthy.
The coronavirus is having far-reaching consequences around the world. Before I walk you through our results for the quarter, let me share what we're doing now to respond to the challenge of COVID-19. Our focus is to balance cash preservation and profit protection. To that end, we're ensuring adequate cash flow and liquidity to navigate the choppy waters, including suspending our share buyback program and drawing down on our revolver. We are actively managing our supply chain and inventory flow, while leveraging our F.L.X. platform, while cutting our second half purchases and evaluating the most efficient way to reflow the small amount of seasonal items we have on hand, and soon, we will leverage existing capabilities, such as ship from store, to help manage inventory.
On cost management, we're substantially reducing advertising spend, and we are pulling SG&A levers available to us to cut costs in our business operation, such as the compensation cuts and furloughs Chip mentioned, freezing travel and headcount, significantly reducing variable expenses and negotiating with landlords to abate rent for the periods stores are closed. And we're reducing our capital spend on discretionary projects while reevaluating our store rollout plan. We're deferring our new distribution center in Europe and are now targeting a reduction in annual CapEx spend of up to 30%. We have closed the majority of our doors and those of our franchise partners to help slow the spread of the virus. Currently, about 70% of these doors are closed, 20% are fully open, and the balance are operating on reduced hours.
With respect to our first fiscal quarter of 2020, we are pleased to have delivered strong revenue growth, record-high gross margin and adjusted diluted EPS ahead of our expectations. And if it weren't for the virus impact, we would have exceeded our adjusted EBIT expectations as well. The underlying momentum of our business continued to be very strong as well as our balance sheet and returns on invested capital. This is especially true in our global store fleet, where the 3-year average return on invested capital for the fleet is over 20%. As I walk you through additional detail on our first quarter results, my comments will reference constant currency comparisons on a year-over-year basis in U.S. dollars, unless I indicate otherwise. We published the details of our reported and constant currency results in today's press release so I will not repeat all of those here.
First quarter net revenue of $1.5 billion grew 6%. The estimated $20 million adverse impact in Asia of the coronavirus, combined with the unrest in Hong Kong, adversely impacted revenue growth by about 2 percentage points. Also note that we're lapping a strong first quarter 2019, which we grew 11% overall. Levi's men's volume was flat for the quarter. Our global 10 -- our top 10 global wholesale accounts collectively grew 5%, and our top 5 mature markets grew 3%, and within that, the U.S. was up 2% for the quarter. Our total women's business grew 12% in the first quarter on the back of high-teens growth last year. And our total tops business grew 5%. Direct-to-consumer grew 13% for the quarter. Revenue from our brick-and-mortar stores were up 14% globally, and global e-commerce was up 12%. Our total digital ecosystem grew double digits in Q1 and now comprises more than 15% of our total company's revenues, double the size of what it was just 3 years ago. Gross margin in the first quarter was 55.7%, a record high for the company. This represented an increase of 110 basis points on a reported basis, reflecting the benefit from the price increases we have taken as well as higher direct-to-consumer and international growth. Currency effects were negligible.
Adjusted EBIT margin of 12.6% declined 180 basis points on a reported basis, entirely due to our plan to smooth advertising, higher charges from equity-settled awards and the timing of -- and the timing of related payroll taxes and approximately $10 million of lost adjusted EBIT from the coronavirus. The benefit of Black Friday revenues in the current year, which favorably impacted adjusted EBIT margin by about 70 basis points, was substantially offset by an estimated 50 basis points adverse impact from the coronavirus. Adjusted diluted EPS for the first quarter of $0.40 increased $0.02 on a reported basis compared to the same quarter in the prior year, slightly trailing 8% reported adjusted net income growth due to the increase in the company's share count resulting from our IPO. The estimated adverse impact of the coronavirus was $0.02. Currency unfavorably impacted adjusted net income by 2 percentage points, and adjusted EPS -- diluted EPS by $0.01.
Now I'll share more detail on the first quarter results of our 3 regions in constant currency unless I state otherwise. Our results benefited from the calendar 2019 Black Friday week, which fell into our fiscal Q1 2020. As such, my regional comments today will focus on our business results adjusted for Black Friday. First quarter revenue in the Americas was flat when adjusted for Black Friday. We were really pleased with direct-to-consumer growth of 10% when adjusted for Black Friday, which was a combination of e- commerce growth, new brick-and-mortar stores in the region and same-store sales growth. The region's direct-to-consumer growth was offset primarily by a decline in U.S. wholesale, which was down 4% when adjusted for lower shipments to off price. This was a bit better than our expectations, especially as we were lapping high single-digit U.S. wholesale growth in the prior year. So on a 2-year stack, U.S. wholesale was positive. Our women's business continues to be the standout of U.S. wholesale, where it grew double digits this quarter.
Europe's revenues were up 11% when adjusted for Black Friday, with growth, again, broad-based across channels, product segments and markets, and this was another quarter of lapping double-digit growth in the prior year. Direct-to-consumer revenues were up 9% adjusted for Black Friday, and wholesale revenues were up 12% on broad growth across markets and our customer base. The women's business posted another quarter of stellar growth, up 19% versus last year. And Levi's men's margins grew an impressive 10%, fueled by innovative new fits that resonated with consumers.
In Asia, we estimated net revenues growth of 9% when adjusted for declines related to the coronavirus in the region and the political unrest in Hong Kong. Most of the region's markets grew. In China, prior to initiating store closures in response to the outbreak, our turnaround strategies were really gaining traction as double-digit revenue growth was eclipsing our internal expectations there. At the peak, nearly all our doors were closed, and although traffic remains well below prior year levels, we have now reopened all our company-operated stores in China, including our beacon store in Wuhan and all but 6 franchise doors. Though sales in China remained down to prior year, performance is sequentially improving each week, with our mainline store performance leading the charge, given the premium collection therein. And the company is in the process of taking back stores in Guangzhou and Chengdu from our prior franchise partners. Sales of our digital footprint in China, meaning our e-commerce sites and those operated by our partner, grew in March versus prior year, in particular driven by the strong growth in women's fashion fits. We leveraged our partnership with Tmall in the launch of our Super Mario collaboration, generating a ton of buzz and strong sell-through. And China's gross margins in March are higher than prior year, reflecting the favorable revenue shift towards the direct-to-consumer channel. We are encouraged by the progress we have seen in China, and we are using artificial intelligence and consumer insights to inform the playbook we'll use for other markets as they begin to recover.
Turning to balance sheet and cash flows. In dollar terms, total inventories at the end of the first quarter were down 7% compared to a year prior, continuing the positive inventory leverage trend. The composition of inventory was healthy with more than 70% being evergreen products that carry over well into future seasons. We have full visibility into our inventory across all stages of our supply chain, and we are working proactively, leveraging the strong relationships we have with our suppliers and customers around inventory levels, and have aggressively cut purchases and canceled orders for the second half of 2020. We are working with our suppliers to manage the flow of finished goods, in line with reduced demand in the short term. We are pulling all agility levers, including F.L.X., which is unique to LS&Co. to respond to changes in demand. We are working to extend the life cycle of the inventory we have on hand by carrying evergreen products forward into subsequent seasons, while infusing some new products in by carrying over fabric into products for subsequent seasons as much as possible. Even in a promotional environment, given the strength of our brand and inventory actions, we believe we can strike a good balance between gross margins and driving revenue.
We have built a very healthy balance sheet and ended the quarter with access to nearly $1 billion in cash and another $820 million available under our credit facility, which is backed by strong high-quality financial institutions. And our next debt maturity comes in 2025. Cash is king in situations like this, so in the current environment, we felt it prudent to further augment our cash on hand and accordingly drew $300 million on our credit facility last week. This brings available cash to $1.2 billion while retaining availability of more than $0.5 billion on our revolver. With nearly $1.8 billion in total liquidity, we are better positioned than many to meet this challenge in the near term and emerge stronger when things normalize.
We'll continue to deploy capital on a disciplined basis so as to fuel select long-term growth initiatives, although at a prudently lower level with fewer store openings than we announced on our last call. We are also sticking with quarterly dividend payment for now and have announced our second quarter dividend, which will again be $0.08 per share. This will bring first half dividends to approximately $64 million, an increase of 16% as compared to the first half of 2019. We will reassess dividends for the balance of the year as the situation evolves.
Under our share buyback program, we've already repurchased a sufficient number of shares to offset our 2020 employee stock grant dilution estimate. Based on present circumstances, we do not anticipate the need to do further share buybacks for the remainder of the year and accordingly have suspended the program.
And finally, a word on guidance. Given the unprecedented phenomenon of the coronavirus pandemic and the significant economic uncertainty it introduces, we have made the decision to withdraw guidance for the time being. Once we believe that we have sufficient visibility to reinstate guidance, we will do so.
In summary, prior to when the coronavirus started to impact our results, our business trends and financial results were very strong. And even in the current situation, we remain a strong, purpose-driven company with powerful iconic brands and a confident outlook on our long-term growth opportunities once we emerge from the current crisis. We are geographically diversified, which will provide us the ability to capture best practices as well as sales as they come back in various markets. Our global diversified supply chain is agile enough to enable us to wisely manage inventory and to maximize our opportunity for working capital efficiency. We are being nimble in response to the developing situation. In addition to the actions we're taking now, we'll continue to drive lower costs as necessary to mitigate the profitability. To mitigate the -- okay. We're taking -- we're being nimble in response to the developing situation. In response to the actions we're taking now, we'll continue to drive lower costs as necessary to mitigate the profitability pressure from lower revenue. And we'll rightsize capital development to cover our highest priority, in order to preserve and drive the most efficient use of cash.
Our strong balance sheet provides us sufficient liquidity to carry us through this difficult time. We have a deep talent base around the world, and most importantly, we are one of the most iconic apparel brands loved by fans worldwide and increasingly by younger consumers who care about companies that do well and do good. We will focus on what we can control and expect to emerge from this challenging time as a stronger company. With that, we'll now open it up and take your questions.
[Operator Instructions] Your first question is from the line of Matthew Boss from JPMorgan.
Next participant is from the line of Heather Balsky from Bank of America.
Glad to hear everything is going well, and everyone is in good health. Can you just talk about how your various wholesale partners in Europe and in the U.S. are responding to this in terms of working capital and in terms of inventory orders? And then can you talk about the levers and tools you have to manage working capital during this downturn?
Heather, glad to see you safe and healthy. Thanks for asking the question. We are blessed that we have customers and wholesale partners that we have great relationships with. We are working with each one of them on a case-by-case basis. We're collecting the cash that's owed to us. We are managing inventory. The good news is that, as I mentioned, given that our inventory levels were generally healthy as we entered the quarter and ended the 2019, we're in a good spot. A large piece of our inventory, including the in-trade inventory, is core. So we believe that once the retailers open their stores and we open our stores, we'll be able to work through that. And we are in discussion with our partners. We are asking them to pay us what they owe us, which is the standing of a good relationship, and we're working through with them to be ready when the crisis is over and behind us.
One other quick thing I would add, Heather, is we do have customers that are still in business and still opening their doors and still shipping products. So Walmart, Target, Amazon here in the U.S. are all trading, and we're still shipping product to them, and same is true with some of the pure-play e-commerce players in Europe. So we do have some revenue right now and some consumer transactions happening in wholesale. But as you know, the majority of the large department store chains here in the U.S. are closed. And that's largely true in Europe, across Europe as well.
We have our next question from the line of Matthew Boss from JPMorgan.
Great. And congrats on a nice quarter. So Chip, as we think about the brand's top and bottom line acceleration into the crisis, I thought your prepared remarks were actually really interesting. I guess how do you weigh market share versus profitability to emerge from this as a stronger brand, as you said, without taking some level of a step back?
Yes. So I sort of talked about it in the prepared remarks, we are very focused right now on how do we come out of this stronger as a company, but also how does the Levi's brand come out of this crisis even stronger? So let me hit a couple of things on why I think that's possible. First of all, coming into the crisis, there's a very good proof point about the strength of the brand, and that is called pricing power. We have been talking about pricing power. We took pricing at the end of last year, and you saw it flow through in the gross margin and gross profit line this year, I mean -- or this past quarter, Q1. So nothing better demonstrates the strength of a brand than the ability to price. And we did that successfully in Q1.
Second, we're continuing to invest during this period. We have not gone completely dark. We are cutting back -- to be very clear, we are cutting back on A&P, but we're being deliberate and strategic about actions that we can take to strengthen the relationship between the brand and the consumer. And the 5:01 concert series is, I think, a great proof point of that. And every day, it just keeps getting more momentum. We're trying to find ways to connect more strongly with consumers during the period of time that they're cooped up.
Third is on the product front. We are going to continue to bring newness. This Super Mario from Nintendo collaboration, that's dropped in China and Asia and Europe and drops later this week here, brings some fun and some newness to the brand. So we're not stopping. We're not pausing. We're continuing to go forward on product and product innovation. And finally, we're going to continue to leverage digital, everything digital. So we launched the app a few months ago, and that's off to a really good start. We've got our loyalty program, we're going to continue to double down on that, and our e-commerce business.
And then I guess the last thing I would say is I do believe crisis creates opportunities. There are going to be some players in this industry that don't make it, and that's going to open up real estate opportunities for us potentially. It could -- we could wind up being the share beneficiary of others not making it. And as I kind of cruise the Internet and Instagram and look at our Facebook page and stuff, a lot of people are writing about, well, I'm working at home, I'm kicking back in my Levi's, and it's become a Levi's moment. And I think that gives us something to build on as we come out of this crisis.
So we're really focused on it, and I'm very, very confident that whatever the shock is to the consumer and the economy, when the consumer does emerge from hibernation, they're going to want to go back to the brands that they love and to the brands that they're comfortable with, and they've got a relationship with. And that's why I believe we're poised to win in this environment.
Great. Maybe to switch gears to Europe. So it's close to 1/3 of your sales. It's been a meaningful driver of growth. So maybe precrisis, can you speak to profitability metrics and drivers of the pricing power that you were seeing in Europe? And then as we think postcrisis, just the remaining opportunity as we think about the profitability and pricing opportunity that you continue to see in Europe.
Sure. Matt, precrisis, as you know, we've been growing Europe now in the mid-teens and for a couple of seen clear leverage, which means that we've been growing the top line as well as driving leverage to the bottom line. We did take pricing in the second half of last year. That pricing stuck and has continued to stick just -- until just before the crisis. The brand is very, very strong. Our entire portfolio of products are resonating really well in Europe. So think men's bottoms, which were up 10% in the quarter. Our women's business grew 19% on top of real strong growth the previous year. And so we've also continued to see growth in tops. Execution continues to be very strong across both franchise and our company operations. So our view is that, as stores begin to reopen, the strength of the brand, besides all the pricing that we took and the wonderful execution that the team on the ground brings to the market, I think will stand us well especially as some of our other peers or competitors, who are in a tougher position, think through things differently. So we've gained market share. We think we'll emerge out of the crisis a lot stronger.
Next question is from the line of Paul Lejuez from Citigroup.
I'm curious, and I'm sorry if I missed it, but did you say that you've seen an acceleration in your e-com sales since stores have been closed? And curious what you're seeing in terms of changes to the basket size and mix of business. And just curious if online sales may be skewed towards bottoms versus tops more so these days than normal.
Yes, Paul. So the acceleration or the growth in the digital business, we have seen in China. So China at the end of the first month as stores have opened, the business is positive year-over-year. Across our other e-commerce business, the business is broadly flat, I would say. Asia is up. Asia is positive. Europe and the U.S. is slightly down. So overall, the business has been flat. In terms of your question of bottoms and tops, the ratio, both in China as well as in the U.S., is broadly the same it was before the crisis. So we haven't seen any dramatic change in the mix of the business.
No Zoom effect?
Thanks, Harmit. And just to be clear
I mean I think the other -- it's important to note that over the years, we've continued to add stretch in our bottoms. And I think at last count, over 80% of our bottoms had reasonable amount of stretch. So to Chip's point, people working at home probably are feeling a lot more comfortable.
Yes. And can you also talk about in your DTC business, first quarter, ex Black Friday, strong performance? I'm just curious if you could break down e-com versus full price versus factory stores.
I think if you look at our first -- quarter one, our brick-and-mortar was up 14; e-commerce was up 12. I don't have the e-commerce numbers on top of my head ex Black Friday. But I don't have it off the top of my head, but I would say both were reasonably strong from that perspective.
Your next question is from the line of Kimberly Greenberger from Morgan Stanley.
Okay. Fantastic. I wanted to start with just understanding what percentage of your total inventory would have some sort of a seasonal element as opposed to evergreen sort of product? If you could help us understand that because perhaps there's less markdown risk on the evergreen product. And then secondarily, what are you hearing from your vendors in terms of third quarter orders or fourth quarter orders? What's the early look at your -- at your order book? And then lastly, what sort of markdown support or margin support are your wholesale partners currently looking for?
Yes. Kimberly, as I said, the good news is we have worked away at inventory and improving inventory turns over the last couple of years. So the inventory leverage, which is the growth or the decline in inventory relative to the growth in revenue, has been positive. So we entered the quarter with inventory down 7%. 70% of that is core. I would say seasonal inventory is about 15% to 20%. And we are working through with both our wholesale partners as well as franchisees in ways and means we can, as the stores open, sell that product. I think, going back to what Chip said, the strength of the brand as well as the newness that our products bring to bear, we are generally confident that we can balance growing revenue and gross margin. The other thing on gross margin, just to your point, we're starting at a very good spot. Our gross margins are at a record high. And I think that will bode us well, both through the crisis as well as we emerge out of it.
To your question about the discussions on order book, et cetera, again, it's case by case. We have adjusted our inventory based on the demand signal we have got. We have a fairly flexible supply chain, and so if things come back faster, we can flex it up. We also have the F.L.X. platform where we can chase fashion trends because we have length, which is, again, something that is going to be a competitive differentiation for us relative to the rest of the folks in the apparel industry.
I guess the only other thing to add is -- just real briefly, is -- and I think we said it in the prepared remarks, but we have cut all unfilled purchase orders in the second half of the year. So we are trying to aggressively manage the second half inventory in terms of inbound, just recognizing that everybody -- all of our customers are going to have to work off this inventory from their stores being closed. But the good news is more than 70% of our inventory is core replenishment and that can carry over to the next season.
Great. Okay. Then last for me. I understand that when China reopened, the stores were still comping down. If you think about the last week or 2, what's sort of the magnitude of the recent performance in comparable store sales for China?
Yes. I hate talking about averages on a store base of 500 stores. We have mixed performance there. We have some stores that are already comping ahead of prior year, and we have some that are still significantly down versus prior year. But I think what's important is, since the stores started reopening, traffic has kind of improved sequentially, kind of week over week. And our business performance in the aggregate has improved week over week, and we're seeing our e-commerce business now comping consumer is coming back, albeit maybe a little bit tentatively, but there's -- there are green shoots of optimism.
It's also worth noting that our mainline doors, particularly the ones that have our more premium assortments in them, seem to be doing best right now versus prior year. And that may be part of the playbook as we go forward.
And gross margin, Kimberly, you heard me say, gross margins were up.
We have our next question from Bob Drbul from Guggenheim.
I was just wondering if you guys -- I was wondering if you could talk a little bit more just like U.S. wholesale, but specifically the mass channel in terms of what you've seen there, what you're seeing there. A lot of discussion around tops in mass versus bottoms in mass. I was just wondering if maybe you could just talk to those trends, even post quarter end.
Okay. Well, I did kind of allude to it that both Walmart and Target are still open, and we continue to be very optimistic about the test which we've now continued to expand, we're kind of north of 100 doors with Target, feeling really, really good about that. As Harmit mentioned earlier, we haven't really seen a dramatic shift from bottoms to tops. I know a lot of people are talking about that, and they're calling it the Zoom effect. People are wearing their pajamas down below and a nice top up above. But we haven't really seen a dramatic shift to our mix from tops to bottoms on our businesses. So we're encouraged with the business performance of Levi's Red Tab at Target. We also have our value brands, Signature and Denizen, in Walmart and Target. And they actually were flattish, down about 1 point or 2 points versus the prior year in Q1. And that may have been -- we're still trying to figure out how much of that was consumer and consumption-driven versus those customers shifting their open-to-buy budgets to other household necessities: toilet paper, paper towels, hand sanitizer and food. I suspect it's probably more of the latter than it is the former. So we'll see as this crisis unfolds.
But I do think it's important to say that we do have a portfolio of brands, and these value brands play a role in our portfolio. And as the consumer gets shocked and potentially as we see big spikes of unemployment, we've got a brand there for the consumer, and it's great product at that value price point.
Got it. And in terms of the supply chain generally, have you been able to procure everything sort of timely? And has that been operating for you pretty smoothly?
We're good right now. Well, I was just -- I mean, very shortly, in short, yes, we're good. And we're good with what we have on hand right now. And particularly with just about everybody being closed, we're more than good. And we're pretty confident about what we have coming in for the second half. So a good part of the second half is already produced and waiting to go onto boats to ship over here for later in the summer when it should be hitting consumer -- or customers' floors.
Harmit, I don't know -- I'm sorry if I cut you off.
Yes. No worries, Chip. This is a wonderful virtual dialogue. But I'd say 3 other things, Bob. First, as a value-based company that's been around 167 years, we're taking full responsibility for finished, ready- to-ship orders. And we're working on timetables, adjusted timetables, with our vendors. We have a program in place for our vendors to get early payments at favorable market rates, and several vendors take advantage of this already. We're looking at ways to expand this program to the benefit of vendors. And last but not the least, Chip talked about a $3 million grant. Of that, we're granting $1 million to organizations that support apparel supply chain workers with a focus on public health responses, particularly for women, and we're working with industry stakeholders to explore options for broader collective response so that we can support workers during this crisis. So we're doing a lot more than just making sure the goods we need are delivered.
Got it. And if I could just sneak in one more question. I know that the Nintendo Super Mario Bros. launch has gone well internationally. Is it true that Chris Ogle got an early pair for the ones here in the U.S., and that's what he's wearing during this conference call?
He is absolutely wearing it. How did you know? That's crazy.
A little birdie told me that.
It is true. It's a really fun product. It hits later this week. So hopefully, everybody will go out and get some. Thanks, Bob.
Your next question is from the line of Omar Saad from Evercore ISI.
Next question is from the line of Jay Sole from UBS.
Great. Chip, you mentioned there could be some real estate opportunities that arise from this situation. Just related to that, can you talk about any progress you've made over the last quarter developing the full price store model for the U.S.?
Yes. It's -- we remain really optimistic about this new store model, which is smaller footprint, better location. We've got a couple of them. We have a few more coming. We're not stopping those. Those are still planned to open later this summer. The one I always talk about as an example is the Stanford Mall. We need to, I guess, get a little bit more clarity on how long and how deep and how much of a problem do we really have here from a financial standpoint before we can commit to whether we would accelerate that model or not. I mean, as Harmit said, balance sheet and cash is king right now, and we don't want to get out over our skis from a capital standpoint. But we're bullish about this, and I'm very optimistic about it, impact, and it will create opportunities, and it could create opportunities for us to find more of those kind of locations more quickly.
And if we've got the financial strength and flexibility, we may pounce on it and not miss the opportunity to capitalize on the environment and the situation that's going to happen. So we remain optimistic about it. These stores, the ones that we've opened that are kind of along the lines of this model, are profitable. I think Harmit said it in the script, but our ROIC on our store base right now on a global basis is like 20%. So we clearly have an opportunity for more mainline doors here in the U.S. We only have a little bit more than 30 right now. So we'll take advantage of the opportunity if the right opportunities come along.
Got it. And then maybe if I could just ask one more on inventory. You talked about the uncertainty of the situation, and it's got to be difficult to plan for holiday not knowing how consumers are going to behave and if they're going to be coming back to stores or if they're going to increase shopping online. Can you just touch on a little bit more the kind of flexibility that you have to be able to shift inventory between stores and online? Just to react to whatever happens as we go through the rest of the year?
Yes. Well, I'd say, first and most importantly, we've developed the ability to ship from store. We can fulfill e-commerce orders from store, and in fact, we're going to start firing that back up here in the next week or so, just so we can mitigate the potential risk of our e-commerce distribution center or the largest distribution center potentially getting shut down. I mean, in a number of states, distribution centers that aren't shipping food or medicine are getting shut down as not being necessary or business-essential. And so we want to mitigate that possible risk, and we've built that muscle, that capability. So that's the first thing I would say.
The second thing is we've got -- I talked about our e-commerce site, it's basically our best store, and it has a large variety of PC9s and assortments that we have in both our mainline and outlet doors. And we have plenty of flexibility to shift inventory from stores to e-commerce and in both directions. So we've got maximum flexibility to do it.
Hey, thanks, Jay.
Is Omar back?
Yes, Omar.
Yes, we can.
Yes. He just texted me. I think he's back. So operator, can you try and see if you can get Omar back? Otherwise, we'll do one more question.
[Operator Instructions] Your next question is from the line of Omar Saad from Evercore ISI.
Are you guys there? Can you hear me?
Apologies if this has been asked, but I wanted to kind of dive into the consumer behavior side of this equation. I know it's easy and enticing to talk about the pre-coronavirus world and the post-coronavirus world. But it's not yet clear, I think, how long we're going to be in this coronavirus world and what it means on consumer behavior. So anything you're learning in how consumers are acting in China or different parts of China? Any thoughts on how consumer behavior might be the same or different in your categories in Europe or North America? And then, I guess, is the key here when you can reopen stores? Or is the key here when consumers feel comfortable and safe to go back to things like concerts and music festivals and other kind of public bars and happy hours, jeans and casual attire occasions? Or -- so maybe you can kind of walk me through some of those things as well.
Yes. Well, so I'm the big consumer guy here, and we're trying to learn as much as we can in China. And I would say that China may not be a perfect model for everything that we might expect to see in the West, and that's for a whole host of reasons. But it's quite possible here in the West we're going to see a much bigger economic impact, more job loss, and we're already seeing it, right? 10 million people filing for unemployment in the last 2 weeks. And I think all of those dynamics could potentially have an effect on the consumer.
But what I can tell you about China is that, as we brought our stores back up, freshness and newness matter. Our top-selling item for women is the new balloon fit, which we literally just launched. And so they're looking for fashion, they're looking for newness, they're looking for something exciting. The Super Mario Bros. collaboration that we launched on Super Brand Day on Tmall has literally taken off. So newness, fun-ness is going to be important, I think. And we're very, very conscious of that as we plan the second half to make sure that we're leaving ourselves enough flexibility to make sure we've got newness on the floor when the consumer does come back.
But I think what's going to happen here in the U.S., what's going to happen with the consumer, it's one of the big unknowns. And I kind of alluded to it right at the top. It's very difficult to forecast the future right now, not knowing how deep or how long this goes. I would say the deeper the economic impact is and the longer everybody is cooped up, the more of a shock there will be to the system. And it may take longer for the consumer to come back. That's why I think it's really important that we continue to build our relationship with the consumer during this period of time of isolation. We're not going to let them forget about Levi's while they're cooped up in their home. And so building that relationship, remaining authentic and true to who we are. I'm very excited, as you know, as you can tell, from this -- the concert series that we're doing. We're challenging ourselves. What are the other "only Levi's could do that kind of thing" type of moments?
But I still think there's a lot more we don't know than what we do know right now. And we just have to see how the situation unfolds. And -- but continue to play to our strengths and learn from China. And as other markets in Western Europe begin to come back, learn from Western Europe and just keep building our playbook as we go. So that's kind of how I think about it. But as I said, I mean, I do think there will be winners and losers here. And given the strength of our brand, consumers are going to want to come back to their favorites and to the brands that they trust and that they love. And so I think that positions us really well.
We have our next question from the line of Dana Telsey from Telsey.
Chip and Harmit, as you guys have been talking about obviously -- as you've been talking about the expense management underway, one of the buckets, obviously, is occupancy. How are you thinking and what are you seeing in terms of lease terms, either lease renegotiations out of your fleet around the world globally, whether outlet or full line? And I totally agree, there's a lot of opportunity for you to get some better locations, even smaller ones in the U.S. when all of this is said and done.
Yes, Dana. Let me take a stab at that. We're in discussions, like most of other retailers, with landlords. And we are seeing success. I think we've got some great landlords, and they're being mindful of the situation. They like -- we were talking about the brand, they also want great brands. They also want great credit. And they want brands that are going to be here for the longer term. So we're working it case by case, and that's why I talked about it as an opportunity from an expense management perspective.
We also have governments outside the U.S., the U.K., for example, in the fiscal stimulus, they have given an abatement on property tax as a holiday. And so we are leveraging that in different markets. And we're working with the White House and the different associations to try and bring similar practices in the U.S. as part of stimulus form. So I think we feel good about where we are. Obviously, it's difficult to generalize. But as Chip earlier mentioned, if you think about it long term, there probably will be vacancies. It gives us an opportunity to both expand floor space for stores that are really doing well as well as we grow mainline in the U.S. and grow mainline across the world, it gives us opportunities to get into type A locations.
Okay. I think we'll call it there. We apologize for going over a little bit longer, but there were clearly some technology challenges with a couple of questions. Anyway, thank you all for dialing in. We are in a once-in- a-century type of situation right now. And I just hope that you all will stay safe and keep your families safe and healthy. And we look forward to talking with you at the end of the next quarter. And hopefully, we'll be able to talk with more specifics in terms of what we expect for the balance of the year.
Thank you all very much for dialing in, and take care of yourselves.
Thank you, presenters. Ladies and gentlemen, this concludes today's conference call. Thank you all for participating. You may now disconnect. Have a great day.
Good morning. My name is Nick, and I'll be your conference operator today. At this time, I'd like to welcome everyone to Lindsay Corporation Second Quarter Fiscal Year 2020 Earnings Call. [Operator Instructions] Please note, the event is being recorded.
During this call, management may make forward-looking statements that are subject to risks and uncertainties, which reflect management's current beliefs, estimates of future economic circumstances, industry conditions, company performance and fiscal financial results. Forward-looking statements include the information concerning possible or assumed future results of operations of the company and those statements preceded by, followed by or including the words expectation, outlook, could, may, should or similar expressions. For these statements, we claim the protection of the safe harbor for forward-looking statements contained in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. I'd now like to turn the call over to Mr. Tim Hassinger, President and Chief Executive Officer. Please go ahead.
Good morning, and thank you for joining our call. With me on today's call is Brian Ketcham, our Chief Financial Officer. I feel it's prudent to mention that Brian and I are sitting together in a conference room more than 6 feet apart, adhering to social distancing guidelines.
This quarter, in the domestic irrigation business, we saw the resolution of various trade disputes that have been putting downward pressure on farmer sentiment. The market facilitation payments administered through the USDA did significantly contribute to farm income. However, commodity prices did not fundamentally change given the uncertainty that existed in China's expected commodity crop purchases. Until the recent COVID-19 impact, we had observed an incremental improvement in customer sentiment.
We continue to make progress on our innovation and collaboration strategies for FieldNET and FieldNET Advisor. Year-to-date, our penetration rates with our telemetry technology is up 50-plus percent versus the prior year. To enhance the opportunity for farmers to gain access to the Lindsay's telemetry technology and in this case, Pivot Watch, Lindsay will be offering this product on Amazon later this spring. Given the do-it-yourself nature of Pivot Watch, this option will enhance penetration with growers who want to go online to buy the product and install it themselves.
Also, in connection to our collaboration with Farmers Edge, they recently announced their 2020 smart water offering that includes access to FieldNET and FieldNET Advisor for their customer base. Early indications are positive based on their customer acceptance and feedback.
In the international irrigation business, the global project market remains active, but largely uncertain regarding timing. In Brazil, we continue to see growth, and we have made several investments to enhance our commercial capabilities.
For infrastructure, growth in the Road Zipper business continues to gain momentum. In this past quarter, we were awarded a contract from Highways England for supply of a movable barrier system for use in Kent, United Kingdom. Highways England plans for the entire system and related traffic management scheme to be fully operational by December 31, 2020. The total value of the contract as awarded is approximately $28 million.
Also, we have secured another order from our partner in Japan, Nexco East, for a new reactive tension barrier to use with their existing Road Zipper systems. That order value is approximately $10 million, and we will begin delivery in our fiscal third quarter. These are great examples that we are successfully addressing the need to grow this business and reduce the lumpiness.
Last quarter, I shared that our overall sales funnel projects based on a 50% probability of success is at the highest level it has ever been, along with the number of machines being leased on target to be at the highest level ever as well.
One additional point I'd like to share is that we now have potential projects in our sales funnel in more countries than ever before. We stated more than 2 years ago when we launched the Foundation for Growth initiative that for the Road Zipper business, we wanted to increase our leasing business, be active in more countries and increase the overall sales. We are achieving these 3 objectives, and this business is moving in a positive direction. Regarding our Foundation for Growth initiative, we continue to see that the margin improvement projects we implemented are delivering as expected.
Lastly, I'd like to address the impact COVID-19 had on our second quarter results and the associated forward view. In our second quarter, COVID-19 did have an impact on product flow in some cases related to scheduled shipments to and from the affected areas. In addition, our plant in China was temporarily shut down, aligned to the country mandate. At the end of the quarter, this plant resumed operations and is fully operational. Overall, the disruption in quarter 2 was not material to our overall results.
Looking forward, our primary focus is to ensure our employees are safe and to mitigate the various risks connected to the COVID-19 pandemic impacting our business. To the best of our knowledge, we have not had any confirmed cases of employees with COVID-19. We proactively put a number of measures in place to promote employee safety, including eliminating nonessential business travel, implementing return-to- work restrictions for employees returning from travel and evaluating whether meetings may be postponed or held virtually. Our company has moved to a work-from-home direction for roles that can be done at home, and for roles that require the employee to go to the site, we have implemented work restrictions aligned to CDC and Department of Health recommendations, including strict social distancing guidelines that are being deployed in all our sites.
Our businesses and products are generally considered business essentials, to support agriculture and critical infrastructure activities. So our plans will remain operational as long as we have demand for our products, are allowed to remain open by local governments and can provide for the safety of our employees. At the present time, we have temporarily ceased production in our South Africa irrigation facility for 3 weeks due to a government mandate. However, we remain open to support the service parts business.
In order to manage the ongoing challenges for [ COVID-19 ], a rapid response team structure is in place across the company to address issues that arise and identify ways to mitigate potential risk to the business going forward. I would like to take this opportunity to thank our employees who -- to continue to keep our manufacturing facilities operational and allowing us to deliver on our commitments to our customers. I would also like to thank our employees who are working from home, supporting all the other functions of our company. I'd like now to turn the call over to Brian to review our second quarter results.
Thank you, Tim, and good morning, everyone. My comments regarding second quarter comparisons will refer to adjusted results for the prior year, which omit the impact of Foundation for Growth costs that were incurred in that period. Adjusted results for the prior year are detailed in the Regulation G disclosure at the end of the press release. No adjustments were made to current period results.
Total revenues for the second quarter of fiscal 2020 were $113.8 million compared to $109.2 million in the same quarter last year. Net earnings for the quarter were $5.5 million or $0.51 per diluted share compared to net earnings of $200,000 or $0.02 per diluted share in the same quarter last year.
Irrigation segment revenues for the second quarter of fiscal 2020 were $92.1 million compared to $95.8 million in the same quarter last year. North America irrigation revenues of $65.7 million increased $8 million or 14% compared to $57.7 million in the same quarter last year. The increase resulted primarily from higher sales of replacement parts, increased irrigation equipment unit volume and higher revenue from engineering project services. Average selling prices for irrigation equipment were slightly higher compared to the second quarter last year. Higher sales of replacement parts were due to the timing of deliveries under our fall restocking program as we saw a shift in a portion of our sales from first quarter to second quarter.
In the international irrigation markets, revenues were $26.4 million compared to $38.1 million in the same quarter last year. The decrease resulted primarily from a large project sale in a developing market in the prior year that did not repeat. In addition, approximately $1.1 million of the decrease resulted from differences in foreign currency translation rates.
As previously mentioned, current year project sales in developing markets have been impacted by delays in start dates and are now being further impacted by delivery constraints created by travel restrictions as well as border closings in some countries as part of efforts to contain the spread of the coronavirus.
Total irrigation segment operating income for the second quarter of $9.6 million was $2.1 million higher than the prior year, and operating margin improved to 10.4% compared to 7.9% in the prior year. Operating income and margin improvement resulted from higher North America sales and from improved cost and pricing performance. These improvements were partially offset by the impact of incremental costs of approximately $1 million incurred during the quarter, including severance and commercial development expenses.
Infrastructure segment revenues for the second quarter of fiscal 2020 were $21.7 million, an increase of $8.3 million or 62% compared to the same quarter last year. The increase resulted from higher Road Zipper system sales and lease revenues and an increase in sales of road safety products compared to the prior year. Infrastructure segment operating income for the second quarter was $6.4 million compared to an operating loss of $400,000 in the prior year. Operating margin for the quarter was 29.3% of sales. Operating income and margin improvement resulted primarily from increased sales in higher-margin product lines and from improved cost and pricing performance. In addition, operating income for the quarter included a gain of $1.2 million on the sale of a building that had been held for sale. Turning to the balance sheet and liquidity. Lindsay is well positioned with a strong balance sheet and sufficient liquidity as we face the uncertainty and challenges presented by the global coronavirus pandemic. Our total available liquidity at the end of the second quarter was $170 million with $120 million in cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities and $50 million available under our revolving credit facility. Our total long-term debt was $116.5 million at the end of the second quarter, and of that amount, $115 million matures in 2030. At the end of the quarter, we were well within the financial covenants of our borrowing facilities, including a funded debt-to-EBITDA leverage ratio of 2.0 compared to a covenant limit of 3.5. At this time, I would like to turn the call over to the operator to take your questions.
[Operator Instructions] First question comes from Brian Drab, William Blair. Mr. Drab, are you there? Is your line on mute?
We'll move to the next question. That comes from Mr. Nathan Jones of Stifel.
I guess I'll start with the question on everybody's mind, and that's the impact of coronavirus. I know you guys gave some updates on the impact in the second quarter, but things haven't really started to pick up at all then. Our checks of your -- yours at Lindsay, yours and Valmont's dealer network really shows that the dealers are not expecting, domestic irrigation dealers, are not expecting much of an impact from coronavirus on demand. Could you maybe talk a little bit about what you saw in March specifically, if there was a change in the demand patterns relative to what you'd expected or if there was a change in the demand patterns as we went through the month?
Yes, Nathan, this is Tim, and this is an important question. So let's talk about it in a broader sense, and then we'll come to exactly what we're seeing relative to demand as a result of that. But we did move to a work-from-home direction, as I had mentioned, and then for the roles that are, with employees that need to go to the site, we are following the CDC and health official recommendations. The business impact that we had for second quarter, we put as less than $1 million operating income. To your point, we were on the front edge of the COVID at that point in time. Currently, of our 9 manufacturing plants, 8 are still fully operational, and the one in South Africa, this plant is continuing to support replacement parts and service. Now when we evaluate whether to keep a plant running, we really look at 3 key questions: Is there -- is the -- what's the current demand level; is the business classified as business essential; and are the safety guidelines that are in place being followed? And then that determines whether we continue to operate that plant.
So in terms of what we're seeing from a demand standpoint, it speaks to what you're saying is, overall, I would describe the farm community hasn't felt the impact as what urban areas has from a reality and also from just a concern or perception standpoint. Right now, we would describe as, on the ag side, more concerning would be the lower commodity prices that are across most of the major ones.
And do you see any -- I mean, I guess, we'll do the whole portfolio. In March, did you see any deviations relative to what you'd expected to see specifically from COVID-19?
Well, we would describe our demand pattern without going into forward-looking comments here, Nathan, as saying we've been encouraged by what we've seen so far.
Okay. I guess my next question is you and everybody else are starting to put practices into your facility, that are likely to create inefficiencies. I mean if you make people stay 6 feet away from each other and all those kinds of different things that you put in place within those facilities, I would imagine that, that causes some inefficiencies, reduces throughput, increases costs to some extent, I'm sure it varies by different locations. But maybe you could talk about the impact that those things are having on your own operations?
Well, first of all, the types of activities that we've implemented, what we refer to as strict social distancing, which leads to things like redesigning break rooms, doing staggered shifts, taking staggered breaks, those types of activities, definitely, that brings another level of complexity, and typically, complexity can bring some additional cost. But at this point in time, Nathan, I wouldn't describe it as meaningful in the cost side.
Next question comes from Mr. Brian Drab with William Blair.
Yes, Brian.
Okay. So sort of building on some of the COVID concerns. Is there any chance that the outbreak or social distancing will affect interactions between dealers and customers? Or is it -- I guess, Tim, you just mentioned kind of the perception and concern regarding COVID maybe in the more rural areas, where the deals are being done just it's not really hindering the interactions as much?
Brian, I wouldn't say it's not having an impact on interactions because the social distancing obviously brings -- again, I'll use the word complexity, a level of that, to the interactions that are going on. But I think the key here is, will it impact demand, and at this point in time, I -- we don't have signs of saying that if a farmer wants to move forward with a purchasing decision, that the social distancing guidelines are getting in the way of that transaction occurring.
Okay. And I was thinking about this and I would imagine that, potentially, the outbreak has more of an effect on some of the smaller growers versus some of the corporate farms, like Frito-Lay, et cetera. Can you comment at all about what your exposure is to the larger corporate farms, whether that's a majority or minority of irrigation sales?
Yes. Brian, this is Brian Ketcham. Yes. I think we have a large part of our business that is directed towards more of your large corporate growers. I think to your point, on companies like a Frito-Lay, it also speaks to the pressure that's being put on right now on commodity prices relating to potatoes, as an example, with restaurants and schools being closed. I think there's some downward pressure on potato prices. There's also some downward pressure on dairy. But I guess, given the time of year that we're in, a lot of the purchasing decisions for this year have already been made. I think the big unknown at this point is, how long does the situation continue, and what is the impact on commodity prices as we get into next fall and post-harvest time.
Okay, okay. And then if I could just ask 2 questions on the infrastructure side. Can you give us any sense for the timing, the revenue and how much will come in each quarter from this U.K. Road Zipper project?
Yes. So we will begin deliveries probably in April, picking up in May. Our expectation is that we will have this in place by the end of our first quarter next year. But if you -- there's some variables and assumptions in regard to people being able to work on the project and things like that, which, at this point, we feel comfortable with that situation. So I think it's -- if you divide that $28 million over a 6-month period, that will give you a general flavor for how that would fall.
Okay. Is it fair to -- I think, I guess, see if I have the quarters right, because I mean you have a May quarter, right, June, July, August. So I guess in the May quarter, maybe 20%; August quarter, 40%; and then the November quarter, 40%. Is that a rough -- even in the ballpark of roughly how to think about the distribution?
It's -- yes, I think it's in the ballpark. I think the May quarter would be probably a little less than that just because of where the startup will be later in April and then into May. So you'll probably look at it, maybe $5 million or $6 million in the quarter.
Okay. $5 million or $6 million in the May quarter, did you say $5 million or $6 million?
Yes. Yes.
Okay. And then last question is, how excited are you about the prospects for a major infrastructure bill? How would that affect your business?
So Brian, we definitely believe there is the potential of that. We're monitoring that closely. We do see that as a significant opportunity for our business. So there is a level of excitement here of what potential that could bring.
Next call is from Ryan Connors of Boenning and Scattergood.
Guys, I wanted to just probe a little deeper on the issue of commodity prices. I mean I appreciate the optimism and the idea that maybe this could be just a transitory impact. But I know the USDA's been out there with some pretty aggressive forecasts on planted acreage for corn. As you alluded to, Tim, a lot of those decisions were made before this all came out, and they're saying that restaurant demand is down in terms of food and so forth. So you can paint a pretty dire picture as we get into the fall if the weather cooperates, and this is less than transitory on the demand side, you can paint a pretty dire picture of what commodities could look like 6, 9, 12 months down the road.
So I guess I'd frame it this way. I mean you talk about Foundation for Growth and your margin targets and that sort of thing. When you laid that out, you kind of said, "Look, that's with no help from the cycle", which is appropriate to manage the business independent of that. But if we've -- how do you frame those -- the Foundation for Growth, the margin targets, et cetera, in light of what could be, not only a lack of help from the cycle but some damage, so to speak, from the cycle?
Yes. Ryan, this is Tim. We're going to continue with what we said at the very beginning as we were going to -- expectation and commitment that we could deliver 11% to 12% in a market similar to 2017. To your point, commodity prices have definitely seen downward pressure with what we're seeing in the near term here. Having said that, we feel very good about what we're delivering on Foundation for Growth. We're quite open about saying that we are -- delivered on the projects that we laid out. Example to highlight is in Road Zipper and the shift-left strategy. We feel excellent about what's happening. So we're going to stay with the positioning that we laid out a couple of years ago, but bring proof points of how we're doing along the way. And one of the things that you continue to hear us focus on is what we're doing on the shift-left strategy. We think this is really adding a lot of value to the company.
Got it. Okay. And then one more, more specifically as it relates to Foundation for Growth initiatives and just restructuring the business in general. I mean I guess one of the benefits of having gone through that is that you enter a rougher patch maybe with a leaner shop. But I guess the flip side of that is maybe there's fewer levers to pull going forward. So if we look at some of the fixed lines and the model like G&A and things like that, I mean, have -- is there room there to make more moves if you have to, if the market heads south? Or do you risk kind of cutting into bone there?
These products [ continue ] in what's -- I find very positive about our Foundation for Growth. It hasn't other ones coming forward. So this starts to become part of the culture. But Ryan, another thing I want to highlight, and I think that this is really critical, as we put 4 behaviors in place into our company 2 years ago and as [indiscernible] in this new environment, those new behaviors are really helping us manage the business in this rapidly changed environment. And it has helped us a lot in how we've communicated and how we've structured what we call our response management on that. So in total, we believe Foundation for Growth has helped us in this environment. And I wouldn't say that we're wrong because we're continuing to find new price to put into our funnel, going forward.
Next question is from Joseph Mondillo, Sidoti & Company.
I was wondering, I just sort of wanted to ask another question sort of related to commodity prices, just maybe in a different way. How much do you guys anticipate such as like corn demand there to be affected by this downturn? I know ethanol is a big component of corn consumption, and then obviously, there's the food aspect of demand. And relative to what you just posted in the North America part of the irrigation segment, which was better than I was looking for, how much is that sort of just totally in the past and really, it looks good that things were trending in the positive, but things have changed so much since the February quarter? Could you maybe frame your answer sort of with that kind of a context?
Yes. Joe, you asked on corn, so specifically address that crop. Right now, USDA laid it past, would say that we're going to have the most planted acres on corn since '20. So there's definitely a large interest gravitating towards that crop. A downward pressure on the corn is clearly ethanol. On the other side is the Phase 1 China trade deal. We have to [indiscernible] this is from China on corn, which is helping there. There's some optimism, could that thing, could Phase 1 also include ethanol? So key -- that is a key question here is, lift will come from the China Phase 1 trade deal. But definitely, there is downward pressure across the board on the key commodity crops.
All right. And then I guess I should ask, since no one did, I don't think it's probably going to be overly significant, but the South African plant closure, how significant is that to your overall business?
Today, we are working with the assumption that it will be a 3-week temporary closing. And with that assumption, Joe, we would not call it meaningful with -- assuming that continues to play as we've described here.
All right. And a couple of questions on the infrastructure segment. First off, that Japan Road Zipper, $10 million delivery that you're expecting in the third quarter, was that in the backlog? And then can you talk about how just the overall infrastructure segment sort of outlook is in a scenario of a severe just overall recession, what the challenges are, how effective that business would be or not be just to give us?
Great, Joe. Yes, this is Brian. Both the U.K. project and the $10 million Japan order were added to infrastructure business, what we're being told is, and especially with these 2 projects, they are definitely high priorities for Japan, and they expect to continue to go forward in spite of the coronavirus situation. When you look at the U.S. and the DOTs that we've talked to, they do their planning on a multiyear horizon. So they want to continue to move forward with the projects that they've got planned this year. If not, it causes a significant disruption in their entire planning process. So what we're being told today is the projects that we've got planned and are looking at for this year are going to continue to go forward.
All right. And then one last question. Just in terms of the -- actually, 2 questions. First off, CapEx was a little light in the second quarter. Are you still expecting that $15 million to $20 million like you were originally anticipating? And then number two, on the balance sheet, just given the strength of the balance sheet, I probably would assume that you're going to be a little conservative in the near term, but just sort of more thinking about long term with Foundation for Growth largely completed, how are you thinking about sort of utilizing the balance sheet? Is acquisitions part of your strategy going forward? Or just could you give us an update on that for sort of long-term strategy with the balance sheet?
Yes. First of all, in regard to CapEx, yes, through the first 6 months, we've only spent about $5.3 million. We still -- and the reason for that being a little bit lower than expectation is that some of that CapEx activity was planned to build barrier and machines for the Road Zipper leased fleet. And that spending was temporarily diverted to building up inventory to supply the U.K. project as well as the Japan project. But in the second half of the year, we are still expecting we'll spend between $10 million and $15 million in the second half, which will get us into that $15 million to $20 million range for the year.
Just in general, regard to capital allocation, I would say the priorities remain the same. I think right now, given the current uncertain environment, liquidity and capital preservation is important. We -- at this point, would continue to probably be in a little bit of a holding pattern when it comes to share repurchase. In terms of acquisitions, we continue to have a number of discussions with potential targets. I think one thing we are seeing in that regard too is a little bit of a wait-and-see situation with some sellers right now.
Next question is from Jon Braatz, Kansas City Capital.
On the international irrigation side of the business, obviously, the COVID-19 impact really began having a bigger impact, I should say, in March and in April. When you look at the international irrigation business, would you expect to see added pressure to that piece of the business and maybe even a more difficult second half than what we saw in the first half?
Jon, the area in the international business that I would highlight to address that part of the question is the Middle East. We had started to ship a large project order into that market, and that order had been put on hold due to border closures, which was tied to COVID-19. We do expect the shipments to continue into late Q3 and into Q4, but that's assuming the border crossings are allowed. We see signs of good project demand that will be tendered later this year but not likely for fiscal year '20 delivery. That's where I would describe the biggest impact of COVID-19 at this point in time. The other area I would highlight is South Africa. Given the fact that our plant is, temporarily ceased production, that's due to an overall country mandate. So that's one area where we do activity will be slowed also due to this.
Okay. Brian, one question. On the income statement, there was $1 million other expense item in the quarter. What was that?
Yes, Jon. In the -- it was in the irrigation and the primary drivers there was -- there were some severance costs, both in the U.S. and in the international business, due to workforce reductions. There's also commercial development activities in the U.S., some marketing initiatives around our technology products and then in Brazil, with some of the dealer development expenses with new dealers that were added during the quarter.
Okay. Okay. Is the workforce at the level that you would like it to be? Or would we see -- would you anticipate any other workforce reductions?
Yes, and I would describe that at this point in time, we feel good about where we're at, but we're still -- there's always a continuous improvement mentality. So I'm not going to say there won't be changes. But at this point, we feel good about where we're at, recognizing that there is more unknowns in this environment going forward due to COVID-19.
Next question comes from Chris Shaw of Monness, Crespi.
If I could ask on the irrigation, I guess sort of more broadly, if you go back and historically, you guys were very tied to corn prices it seemed like, going back a decade or so. I was just wondering, given that the -- when you've given the percentages of new irrigation systems versus parts and all that more recently, that's really gone down in terms of new irrigation systems. So just looking now, is the correlation between lower percent at this point and it's mostly replacement parts or other kinds of irrigation, maybe for other crops? And then actually, is corn that big -- is that really -- is that shrunk as an actual end market for you?
Yes. Chris, this is Brian. Well, to your first question, I mean, just in the most recent quarter, new dry land irrigation or new irrigation for the first time was actually at 34% of the total sales. So it still remains within that range that we've talked about in the past of 1/3 in dry land conversion replacement, but we did see different parts of the country, where there's still new development going on in the U.S. To your question on corn, I think we definitely -- there's a strong -- corn drives a lot of irrigation, but there's other markets, what we've talked about, potato market, dairy market, other different types of crops in the Southeast and other areas but corn's still definitely a driver of the overall business.
Do you have a percentage of what the corn end market is for your overall irrigation sales in the U.S. at all? Or...
No. We really don't. And part of the reason is even with potatoes and some of the other crops, corn is still a rotational crop. So it's still important in some of those markets as well. We don't -- it's not really clearly defined.
Right, that makes sense. And then just quickly on infrastructure. The U.K. project and Japan project, are both, those are both sales. There's no leasing involvement in either of those, is there?
That's correct, yes. Both sales.
[Operator Instructions] Our next question is a follow-up from Nathan Jones of Stifel.
Just have a follow-up question on the part sales during the quarter. If I recall correctly, there was an absence of part sales in the first half of calendar 2020, with all the flooding that went on last year. And the anticipation was that some of it will be caught up last year and some of it would be caught up this year. So can you comment on -- was this a more normal level of part sales that you saw this year versus last year? Or are we at an elevated level of part sales catching up from some of the damage that was done in the flooding last year?
Yes, Nathan, this is Brian. The part sales in our first and second quarters are generally going to be more driven by the restocking program that we put in place post harvest. And as you recall, in our first quarter, we were down in part sales year-over-year, and we attributed that to timing of the deliveries this year. And so we saw that happen in our second quarter. So I would say, overall, year-to-date, our part sales are fairly similar to where we were a year ago. I think the flood impact is -- we're probably in that period of time now when these floods really started to impact and then into the summer when some of those machines never -- some of the farmers didn't plant and so the machines didn't run last year. But so far, year-to-date, I would say we're on par with where we were a year ago.
Okay. So potentially some year-over-year increases in parts sales over the next couple of quarters. Just one more. On the infrastructure business, the Road Zipper business, you talked about having a funnel that was bigger than it has ever been last quarter and clearly converted a couple of big orders this quarter. So I'm sure it's smaller than it was a quarter ago. But can you talk about the pipeline of opportunities, how mature those things are, how much more cultivating they need and when you would think you might be able to turn some of those into more orders?
Yes. Nathan, this is Tim. Without giving numbers, what -- I'll describe that has been a part of the Foundation for Growth. We've got a lot more, I'll describe it as a sophisticated sales funnel at different stages, and we're tracking how long it takes to move to each age. What we're really excited about is that we're getting a higher percentage of our business as we continue to go forward into this shift-left category, and that is bringing an additional opportunity for demand that we hadn't had before.
So not only are you seeing better results immediate in terms of the sales that we're getting, but we're able to look back several -- years that we're able to look forward, I should say, several years into the future here, and we see good activity, and then we're tracking each of those stages, how long it takes for those projects to move forward. So that's why I'm able to say that we have the best sales funnel that we've ever had at this point in time. It isn't just because of the near term. It's in total.
At this time, there appear to be no more questions. Mr. Hassinger, I'll turn the call back to you for closing remarks.
This concludes our second quarter earnings call. Thank you for your interest and participation. Have a great day, and be safe.
Good morning. The MGP call will be starting in a few moments. Please continue to hold. Again, the MGP call will be starting in a few moments. Thank you. Good morning, and welcome to the MGP Ingredients First Quarter 2020 Results Conference Call. All participants will be in a listen-only mode. [Operator Instructions] After today's presentation, there will be an opportunity to ask questions. [Operator Instructions] Please not this event is being recorded. I would now like to turn the conference over to Mike Houston, Investor Relations. Please go ahead.
Thank you, Danielle. Good morning, everyone, and thank you for joining the MGP Ingredients conference call and webcast to discuss the company's financial results for the first quarter 2020. I'm Mike Houston with Lambert and Company, MGP's Investor Relations firm, and joining me today are members of their management team, including Gus Griffin, Chief Executive Officer; Dave Colo, President and Chief Operating Officer; and Brandon Gall, Vice President of Finance and Chief Financial Officer. We will begin the call with management's prepared remarks, and then open the call up to questions.
However, before we begin today's call, it is my responsibility to inform you that this call may involve certain forward-looking statements, such as projections of revenue, earnings, and capital structure, as well as statements on the plans and objectives of the company's business. The company's actual results could differ materially from any forward-looking statements made today, due to a number of factors, including the risk factors described in the company's most recent annual and quarterly reports filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission. The company assumes no obligation to update any forward- looking statements made during the call. If anyone does not already have a copy of the press release issued by MGP today, you can access it at the company's website, www.mgpingredients.com.
At this time, I'd like to turn the call over to MGP's Chief Executive Officer, Gus Griffin. Gus?
Thank you, Mike. And thank you all for joining us. At the conclusion of our call in February, none of us could have imagined how our world was going to change in just a few short months. On the call this morning, we will provide details of our performance for the first quarter as usual, but we also spend some time in our comments discussing items, which believe will be of interest to you in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Before we turn to the results for this quarter, I'd like to welcome Dave Colo to the call this morning, as our recently appointed President and Chief Operating Officer. Following my retirement in May, Dave will assume the role of CEO. I feel very fortunate to have had the opportunity to lead such a talented, passionate, and collaborative organization. I also appreciate the strong ongoing support of our Board. I've worked closely with Dave since he joined the Board in 2015, and I am confident he will be a terrific successor in leading MGP. As a Director on our Board, Dave played a critical role in supporting the company's growth over the past several years, and we are very excited to have him on the executive leadership team.
Now, I will turn to the results for the first quarter. We are very pleased with the results this quarter, with consolidated sales increasing 11.2% and gross profit increasing 39.3%. These results reflect strong customer demand in both business segments, and improved effectiveness in our tactical execution. Our results for this quarter reflect growth in premium beverage brown goods sales, as well as significant year- over-year increases in sales of our specialty wheat starches and proteins.
Looking at each segment individually, in our distillery products segment, sales finished the quarter up 7.3% to $80 million, while gross profit increased to $18.2 million or 22.8% of segment sales. These results reflect a 240 basis point increase in gross profit margin, as compared to the prior year period. Sales of premium beverage alcohol were up 9.4% for the quarter. These improved results were primarily driven by a double-digit growth in both sales of new distillate and aged whisky, which led to a 17.1% increase in sales of brown goods. We saw strong demand for our inventory of aged whiskey, including sales of whiskey from our 2015 and 2016 vintages. Sales of aged whiskey reflect lower pricing versus the prior year quarter, but in line with our expectations. Despite some significant changing dynamics at the retail level and potential challenges to specific customers, we believe the underlying macro consumer trends supporting the ongoing growth of the American whiskey category remains strong.
The stay-at-home orders have had a devastating impact on on-premise sales over the past six weeks, while consumers appear to be increasing their consumption at home, driving record increases in off- premise sales during the period. While channel specific trends going forward are uncertain, the category trends seem to be holding strong, with American whiskey continuing to be one of the top growth categories. While sales of premium beverage white goods were down 1.6% for the quarter, margins improved due to lower input cost.
While continuing to implement our broader growth plan, we are also focusing on helping our industrial alcohol customers navigate the challenges they are confronted with as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. We remain committed to continuing the legacy our company was founded on more than 75 years ago by supporting the relief effort with both financial aid and increased production of alcohol for hand sanitizer and commercial disinfectant needs. MGP is uniquely positioned to serve as the backbone of the increased industrial alcohol production in this country, and we're proud to expand our efforts at our Kansas and Indiana facilities during this critical time.
Sales of industrial alcohol increased for the quarter by 5.7%. As a reminder to those new to the story, we typically run our alcohol production close to full capacity to optimize the cost structure of our facilities. While we have experienced increased demand related to COVID-19 over the past several weeks, it's important to point out that a significant portion of our industrial alcohol and premium beverage white goods production was already contracted for a set price last fall. Improved demand for industrial alcohol has come into play in the near term, but we do not view this pandemic as an opportunity to maximize short-term financial results on this product line.
Also of note, sales of dried distillers grains, or DDG, experienced a decline of 1.5%, as compared to the first quarter of 2019. This was due to a slight decrease in sales volume, partially offset by favorable average selling prices. Revenue from warehouse services increased by 10.5%, reflecting, in part, the growth in the number of customer barrels aging in our whiskey warehouses and other services we provide.
Turning to ingredient Solutions. Sales grew 31.4% to $19.1 million. Gross profit increased to $5 million or 26% of segment sales, reflecting a significant increase in gross profit margin, as compared to the prior year period. Our Ingredient Solutions posted its fourteenth consecutive quarter of year-over-year business over the past several years, and we are encouraged by the robust gross margins we were able to achieve this quarter. The majority of this increase is due to our ability to optimize sales in production toward our highest margin products. We also benefited from decreased input cost in the absence of flood- related cost.
Specialty wheat starch sales grew 48.4% this quarter, while our specialty wheat protein sales grew 43.3%, both driven by increased volume and favorable average selling prices. We believe our specialty starch portfolio, particularly our line of fiber products and our recently rebranded ProTerra line of textured proteins, continue to be aligned with strong consumer trends.
While the COVID-19 pandemic continues to create a period of uncertainty and potential challenges, we remain committed to taking the measures necessary to help ensure the safety and well being of our employees. We began our response to the pandemic by mobilizing a Central Crisis Response Team, which has been up and running since mid-March. This broad-ranging team includes members from operations, HR, legal, IT, finance, and our executive team, which meet on a weekly basis. We also created a specialized subgroup of this team, which meets daily. This subgroup was established to manage proactive and responsive actions across our operations. We have direct engagement with all areas of the organization on a daily basis, and have enacted centralized protocols for responding to operational issues as they develop.
We're proud of the aggressive actions put in place to safeguard our employees while they perform their essential work. We continue to look to the CDC, WHO, and state and local health departments for guidance as we move forward at each of our facilities and offices.
This concludes my remarks. Let me now turn things over to Brandon Gall for a review of the key metrics and numbers. Brandon?
Thanks, Gus. For the quarter, consolidated sales increased 11.2% to $99.1 million, reflecting a 7.3% increase in the distillery products segment, and a 31.4% increase in the Ingredient Solutions segment. Consolidated gross profit increased 39.3% to $23.2 million, due to increased gross profit in both the distillery products and Ingredient Solutions segments. Consolidated gross margin increased by 470 basis points to 23.4% of sales, up from 18.7% in the prior year quarter. Corporate selling, general, and administrative expenses totaled $9.5 million for the first quarter 2020, representing an increase of 16.6% compared to the first quarter of 2019, primarily due to increased incentive compensation expense, inclusive of certain incremental costs incurred relating to the transition at the CEO position. Consolidated operating income increased 61% to $13.7 million, due to increased gross profit in both the distillery products and Ingredient Solutions segments, partially offset by increased corporate selling, general, and administrative expenses.
Non-GAAP operating income increased 67.9% to $14.3 million, exclusive of CEO transition costs. Our corporate effective tax rate was 24.7% in the current quarter, compared to a tax benefit of 17.7% in the prior year quarter that resulted from a sizable vesting of share-based awards. Consolidated net income for the quarter increased slightly to $9.8 million, while earnings per share remained flat from the prior year period at $0.57 per share. EPS was affected by improved operating results and partially offset by a prior- year period tax benefit, resulting from the vested share-based awards.
MGP's balance sheet and access to capital remains strong. We remain well capitalized and threw down additional funds on our revolving credit facility during the quarter to maintain a conservative cash position and have sufficient liquidity in the event the pandemic directly impacted operations. As such, we ended the quarter with a debt balance of $96.1 million, and a cash balance of $42.7 million. As of March 31, 2020, approximately $245 million remain available under the $300 million revolving credit line. Our leverage continues to be very low, and given we haven't experienced any significant economic hardship on our business to date as a result COVID-19, we have not participated in any of the lending programs provided by the CARES Act.
First quarter 2020 cash flow provided by operations was $0.5 million, compared to a use of cash of approximately $3.8 million in the prior year quarter, an improvement of $4.3 million. Accounts receivable and days sales outstanding increased $11.5 million at seven and a half days during the quarter, respectively. This increase is consistent with the development of longer sales histories with craft customers, new relationships with export customers, and new long-term supply agreements with large customers, all of which we've discussed on this call in previous quarters.
Customers we extend credit to are mostly large in nature, and all have a combination of strong balance sheets and long payment histories with MGP. As a result, we're not experiencing issues with collections. Historically, first quarter operating cash flow has not been indicative of the whole year. During the period, we also invested a net $7.2 million for growing our barrel distillate inventory for aging. As a reminder to those that might be new on the call today, while we did reduce our annual volume growth expectations for aged whiskey on our call last February, we believe our library of various mash bills and vintages will continue to contribute significant levels of profit for the company going forward. We also believe our inventory set aside for aged whiskey sales in the U.S. market is close to reaching equilibrium on a net basis, and any future inventory increase will be for export sales, new mash bills, and to support the growth of our own brands. Past or even recent quarters are not necessarily indicative of barrel distillate investment in subsequent quarters.
Fluctuations in our quarterly investment can be impacted by a number of factors, including customer demand for new distillate, production efficiencies, mixing capacity, warehouse capacity, and sales of aged whiskey. Our warehouse expansion program has been another important initiative to support new distillate demand for our customers, as well as our investment in aging inventory. As of March 31, 2020, we spent approximately $49.7 million of $49.8 million we projected as a total investment. The program remains on track to be completed later this year.
During the quarter, we purchased shares in the open market as part of a $25 million common stock repurchase program announced in February of 2019. We repurchased 159,104 shares for approximately $4.1 million for a weighted average all-in cost per share of $25.47 during the first quarter of 2020, and we concluded our purchases on March 16. Recently, the Board authorized a second quarter dividend in the amount of $0.12 per share. The Board continues to view dividends as an important way to share the success of the company with shareholders.
Let me now turn things over to Dave Colo for concluding remarks.
Thanks, Brandon. Now, I would like to touch on some additional initiatives that support our long-term strategic plan, but first, address our outlook for the balance of the year. While we are off to a strong start to the year with ample access to capital and encouraging customer demand, our financial results for the balance of the year could be impacted by the COVID-19 virus. Given the uncertainty this pandemic has caused for nearly every industry across the world, it is impossible to predict with any level of precision the pandemic's cumulative impact on our future financial results. For these reasons, we are withdrawing our previous 2020 guidance, and we'll reassess this position based on the visibility of the macroeconomic recovery.
Our balance sheet and access to capital continue to be strong, while we seek to optimize cash management during this pandemic. Although our long-term capital allocation strategy may experience little change, we seek to maintain a conservative cash position, as outlined by Brandon earlier. By renewing our credit facility and expanding our borrowing capacity earlier this year, we have enhanced our access to capital with attractive pricing and terms. As we navigate the effects of this pandemic, we will remain focused on prudent capital management, which is why we have elected to curtail stock repurchases while maintaining our quarterly dividend. The management team, in close collaboration with the board, has the ability to initiate the buyback program or adjust quarterly dividends as circumstances warrant. The American whiskey category continues to experience strong growth and we will continue to invest to support that growth. The demand and pricing in line with our expectations demonstrate the health of this and scale advantage and plan to increase our focus toward growing volume share in the global American whiskey category.
We do not believe this equates to significant changes to overall pricing, but rather refinements to how we approach the selling process, the products we offer and the markets we focus on. Our objective, going forward will be to optimize our brown goods profit by increasing volume share at market-based pricing. Although we believe the American whiskey category trends are long-term in nature, we have identified a handful of potential headwinds for the balance of the year as a result of the pandemic. While we did not experience any significant impact from these potential headwinds during the quarter, we wanted to proactively share what we're seeing across the industry.
The first relates to the potential pantry loading that may have been occurring over the past several weeks, causing off-premise sales to significantly spike. We are unsure how long these purchasing behaviors will continue and what potential impact they might have on future off-premise sales when stay-at-home orders are lifted across the nation. Second, the stay-at-home orders and closures of bars, restaurants and tasting rooms are having an immediate impact on our craf customer sales the past several weeks. We would anticipate these trends to reverse as these establishments reopen. But it is difficult to predict when that might occur in a meaningful way. The third potential headwind is related to our multinational customers. While most have strong balance sheets and access to capital, it is unclear how their conservation of cash may impact our brown goods sales throughout the balance of the year. The last potential headwind we have identified is our near-term ability to grow international sales and export our distilled spirits overseas.
In the first quarter, we began to experience meaningful progress against our ability to expand our international sales. We continue to believe that our investments to expand international sales will provide long-term shareholder value. However, as travel has been curtailed and tariffs in key international markets persist, our ability to further develop this opportunity has been delayed. We continue to closely monitor each of these potential headwinds and will provide additional updates as they become available. Our warehouse expansion project is substantially complete, allowing us to increase our storage capacity to meet the growing demand for our new distillate. We anticipate the conclusion of this project to occur in the second quarter.
As Brandon mentioned, we also invested an additional $7.2 million in our aging whiskey inventory. This brings our inventory of aging whiskey to $111.4 million at cost. The positive brown goods results this quarter continue to demonstrate the long-term value of our aged whiskey inventory. While our focus in the Distillery Products segment will always be supplying other brand owners with premium distilled spirits, we continue to progress our brands initiative with the acquisition of new Columbia distillers based in Washington D.C. We're thrilled to add the Greenhouse Gin brand to our award-winning portfolio This acquisition enhances the depth of expertise and commitment to the category we've developed over the years.
We continue to develop our existing markets focused on increasing retail distribution and velocity per point of distribution for our portfolio brands. Although the current environment is not generally conducive to M&A activity, we will continue to assess opportunities to strengthen our position in growing markets in concert with our financial position in the upcoming quarters.
Our pandemic response plan, which is designed to accommodate evolving information and guidance provided by government agencies and health officials, focuses on protecting our employees and customers and doing our part to help stop the spread of the virus. The Central Crisis Response Team and specialized subgroup Gus mentioned earlier have helped to ensure the safety of our employees as well as to comply with various government restrictions for stay-at-home orders. As directed by these two teams, we will continue to implement social distancing at each of our facilities and offices, paying hourly wage bonus to our production employees, cross-train team members to ensure coverage for critical positions, provide health screenings and monitoring for our employees as well as extending our sick leave policy, restrict travel across the organization, implement work-from-home policies where we are able and lastly, we will continue to have a weekly risk assessment of our supply chain, which includes a daily monitoring of our contractors, transport partners, input producers and all other suppliers and vendors to mitigate any potential disruptions to our supply chain.
Before we conclude our prepared remarks and begin the question-and-answer portion of the call, I would like to express my gratitude to Gus for his success in leading the company. Since joining in 2014, Gus was able to focus the entire organization on a clear strategy, led its successful implementation and, very importantly, helped restore MGP's special culture. We are well-positioned for the next chapter in our story and we sincerely thank Gus for his years of dedicated service to MGP and the lasting contributions he has made to the company. The aggressive implementation of our strategic plan, put in place by Gus over the past several years, has positioned MGP for sustainable long-term growth.
Management team will be focused on continually refining the effectiveness of our tactical execution, accelerating the pace of our strategic implementation and leveraging the strong foundation we have built for growth in 2020 and beyond. We remain confident that focusing on our key strategies will drive superior long-term shareholder value moving forward. Operator, we are now ready to begin the question-and-answer portion of the call.
We will now begin the question-and-answer session. [Operator Instructions] The first question comes from Ben Klieve of National Securities Corporation. Please go ahead.
All right, thanks for taking my questions. First, a couple of questions on the ingredient side. I'm wondering, first of all, if you could kind of break into the growth numbers that you saw in the first quarter. To what degree were there any lumpy one-time sales in there or maybe accelerated buying at the end of the quarter in advance of anticipated volume from consumer goods companies? How can we look at the results from that quarter in that segment in the context of the COVID-19 era?
Hi Ben, it is Dave. I will take that. So, I think as you heard on the call, our Ingredients business has continued to demonstrate good growth. I think it's primarily driven by the fact that we have a well- positioned portfolio both on the wheat protein and the wheat starch side. I think what you're seeing is kind of a continuation of strong consumer demand as consumers continue to migrate to a healthier diet and with our plant-based protein in the Ingredient sector, we really didn't see any anomalies, if you will in Q1 in that business. I think we're just seeing good strong underlying consumer trends with a well-positioned portfolio to support those trends.
Got It. That's great. Then sticking to that segment, to what degree do you see the consumer goods companies adjusting their R&D process in the area of social distancing? I mean, are you seeing delays, are you seeing complete shutdowns from that process or is that continuing relatively uninterrupted? What are you guys seeing on your end?
Yeah, I mean, for the most part relative to the Ingredients, it's relatively been uninterrupted at this point. Although we are seeing some impact in the Foodservice channel primarily related to customers that serve. If you think about sporting event stadiums, entertainment venues of that nature and the products they produce to support those venues, we have seen a slight slowdown in some of those product lines. But for be on trend and in great demand even during this pandemic.
Got it. Perfect. Turning over to the distillery segment you commented a couple of times on the improvement from the export market. I'm wondering if you can comment on a couple of things there. First of all, to what degree did you see kind of a broad macro improvement in the export market versus maybe just kind of uniquely strong execution from your team?
Yes, I think we are that kind of a new part of the organization for us trying to penetrate export sales and our comments were relative to the fact that we started to see some pretty good traction with customer interest and engagement during the first half of the quarter. The last half of the quarter has been impacted by COVID-19 in the fact that substantially, all travel has been shut down. So, it's been difficult to continue the engagement with the customers. It requires travel primarily into the US or our team to go international but the comments were really specific to the work that has been done to date, started by paying some dividends in Q1 but we do see that being delayed until the pandemic clears and we're able to get back more active engagement with our customer.
Got it. Last one from me and then I'll get back in queue. Did you comment on you may be hitting the pause button, if you will, on pursuit of M&A activity, which certainly is understandable In the current environment? My question around that is to what degree do you look at the M&A market right now, especially on the branded Spirits side and see a meaningful decrease in valuations or is it too early to know that yet? I mean what are you seeing in that space right now as the world has evolved over the last 6 weeks?
Yeah, I think there has been a significant slowdown in M&A activity globally, if you see, and if you're looking at Spirits Brands of our company, it's an interesting thing with the COVID impact and with the off-premise sales spiking, I'm sure some companies can view that actually as an opportunity to position themselves from an increased valuation perspective. So, I think we need to let this pandemic play out to really understand the impact on M&A activity and how it will or will not affect valuations of company.
This is Brandan. Just to add to that for a second, I think, to be clear and clarify, we put a pause or curtailed the share repurchase program during Q1. Our comments are on M&A, or is that we are necessarily pausing them at this point in time, but we did say is that we acknowledge that this environment is not generally conducive to M&A as Dave just mentioned, but that we will continue to assess opportunities to strengthen our position in growing markets in concert with our financial position in the upcoming quarters.
Got it. Okay. Thanks, Brandan. Very good. I think that does it for me. Thanks for taking my questions and I'll get back in queue.
Here our next question comes from Bill Chappell of SunTrust. Please go ahead.
Thanks, good morning. I am going to ask probably more than 2 and less than 50 questions. Let's start with the aged inventory. There is more color around the sales this quarter. Was there a postponement from fourth quarter to this quarter? You talked about lower pricing year-over-year. Is that part of the plan to have lower than 3 times pricing and then maybe, is this a start of things to come? Do you feel like we're now getting the process moving forward, where you have more regular sales of aged?
Thanks, Bill. It's Dave. I think part of the sales we saw in Q1 were some carry-over that we expected in Q4. For the price in question, we had a very strong pricing quarter that we were siting over a year ago, but our pricing this quarter is still in line with our for aged. As we go forward, as I commented in the prepared remarks, our approach with aged, with brown goods, in general, is that we want to make sure that we're in a position to grow our volume share and do that -- the market-based pricing so that the end result is we maximize or optimize -- excuse me -- our profit in our brown goods sector. So I think you'll see us continue to talk in those terms and make sure that we're in a position where we're optimizing the profitability of the inventory that we have.
So just to make sure I understand, I mean, do you -- you can make another probability of selling it above cost. That's all I'm just trying to understand. Do you think that aged -- there is steady demand as we go through this year, the prices you're talking about.
Yeah, I think our pricing in Q1 was certainly in line with the historical way we talked about it, 3x, if you will. And we do see continued demand for both new distillate and aged whiskey going forward. I think what we're saying is we just want to make sure as we go forward that we're optimizing the profitability of the entire portfolio and not so focused on 3x, per se, but making sure we're in line with market-based pricing as we move forward.
Okay. And then just last one on the whiskey. I mean, I know there have been some talking [indiscernible] demand for the aged?
Yeah, I think it's -- If you look at Europe, Asia, etcetera, I think there is still demand. It's been put on pause with the accounts that we've been pursuing simply because of the pandemic. As this passes and we understand more the macroeconomic impact of the pandemic, that will help us in line of sight to those -- if the potential still exists, which we believe it will, and how quickly we can restore discussions with international customers.
Okay. And then switching to industrial alcohol. I mean, can you just give us some more color on how that business works, how it worked in the quarter? When I say that, the question I get is you make ethyl alcohol, we hear of ethanol players or Exxon or others kind of moving into this. And at the same point, you're saying you're uniquely positioned within the market. You're, obviously, expanding operations in Indiana as well as Kansas to meet the demand. I understand when Gus says we're not looking for near- term financial gain, you're not looking to price gouge. But at the same point, it would seem, it's pretty dramatic changes to that business over the next few months, so more color on both how you're uniquely positioned, how it works, in terms of kind of pricing and demand and new customers and stuff like that? A tutorial would be helpful.
Sure. So I think you know, I think when Gus made the comments we're uniquely positioned, we've been in industrial alcohol marketer and producer for a long, long time. It was really kind of the foundation of the company in its beginning and we know the market, we know the industry extremely well. The way, traditionally it works we contract the majority of our volume in the fall for the coming calendar year, our fiscal year, if you will. And then there is some volume that's left, it's sold on the spot market, but the majority of it is contracted. So our -- any pricing spike that you would have anticipated as a result of this increased demand in Q1 from the pandemic, we already had the majority of that volume price, if you will.
I think going forward, what we've historically said is the margins in industrial alcohol are very slim and there is a structural issue in the category. And what I mean by that is there is a lot of ethanol. There is oversupply of ethanol in the country right now that's been ongoing probably for the last two to three years. There has been an oversupply of industrial alcohol as well. And something structurally there would have to change before margins can be restored and either industrial or ethanol, for that matter.
What's going on right now in the -- with oil prices so low and nobody is driving anywhere because of the pandemic, the demand for ethanol is really been impacted negatively. So there is a number of ethanol facilities that are closed. What we always watch out for in that environment is making sure our understanding, if some of that ethanol capacity gets converted into industrial alcohol capacity. It requires a capital investment to do that, but that -- there's certainly nothing stopping them from doing that other than the sheer economics of it. So, I guess what I'm trying to say is that there is a short-term blip in demand for industrial due to the pandemic. We're going to watch closely to see, post-pandemic, if the usage of industrial increases because of changes in behavior. Obviously, people more sensitive to viruses, et cetera, that could drive consumer behavior changes, that could increase demand for industrial. But at this point though, I think it's too early to tell how this is going to play out long-term.
So just trying to understand with the contract of -- and I understand long term over the next few years, but I'm just trying to understand, with the way it's contracted out, does that mean -- when would you start to see the benefits of the near-term spiking demand; was that this quarter or is that next quarter or is that at all? Are you kind of trying to step away from this and not try to build up too much?
Yeah, I mean we were on our Industrial Complex, if you will, pretty much at capacity. So I think what we've tried to do to support our customers as their needs have increased during the first quarter here, is we've tried to optimize that output as much as we can. So we started the quarter, call it the first two- thirds of the quarter and we really didn't see an impact from the pandemic. It was really the last third of the quarter where we started seeing increased demand for industrial to make hand sanitizer.
We did as much as we could to put as much volume through our Industrial Complex, if you will, to meet customers' needs. But as far -- if this is going to continue, we think that we're continuing to see strong demand as we sit here today. It's hard to predict how long that's going to continue. From a pricing perspective, any spot purchases that occur for the next few months, there may be a benefit in pricing just because of the demand, but in the near term, I think we do anticipate seeing increased demand. The impact of that on pricing, as I said earlier, [indiscernible] of our volume's contracted, so we're not going to see a real benefit from that and there is potential for the spot market pricing to increase.
Got it. And so last on this, are you adding new customers or is it just you're -- just trying to understand. Are you just basically saying we are going to support our existing customers at pretty similar prices and any excess capacity is just going to go to them and so it's a level kind of increase or improvement over the next few months or you looking at outset new customers?
Yeah. We have long-standing customer relationships, so, obviously, we're taking care of them first and including trying to support the additional needs they have. In scenarios like this, obviously, new customer opportunities exist because people start calling you versus you having to call them, so we also are evaluating new customers. But we'll continue that process as we go forward.
Got it. So one last question. Remind me, just on uniquely positioned, what do you -- right now what you're doing differently versus just ethanol players?
Yeah. Bill, this is Brandon. And so by uniquely positioned, going back to Dave's earlier comments that we've been doing this a long time. And we already have a standing customer base that's designed to as efficiently and quickly as possible get this type of product out to the market where it's needed the most and that's where we've been -- and that's where we've been for more than 75 years. And having those relationships with those existing customer puts us in the unique position to really help respond to this pandemic in the most efficient way possible.
Just to give you an example, on that, Bill, so one of our industrial customers, for example, is producing more than a million bottles of hand sanitizer per day for the response. MGP supplies, a majority of the alcohol of that customer. So just by going through our existing networks, we're able to uniquely add value and -- to the overall effort in response to the pandemic.
Got it. Thanks so much.
Thank you.
Thank you.
The next question comes from Alex Fuhrman of Craig-Hallum. Please, go ahead. Great, thanks very much for taking my question. I thought it was interesting, the acquisition that you made during the quarter. Can you talk a little bit more about the thought that went into that and what kind of an opportunity that could be to expand your gin business. And then just thinking more broadly about your portfolio of brands, obviously, a small part of your business right now, can you talk about how the current environment has impacted your expansion plans for your brands? And does that -- does this change the execution of your branded strategy at all?
Yeah. Alex, this is Brandon and I'll take a start at that. So yeah, we're very excited for the acquisition of Green Hat Gin. It's currently, as you know, located or sold in the Maryland, DC and Virginia and we a premium, super-premium, very well-positioned brand to our portfolio. It's an effort that I think you probably know, we've been talking about potentially adding a gin for some time now and we're very happy to see it come to fruition.
In terms of our overall effort in the branded space, like everybody else, we're not immune to a lot of the challenges that are out there, it's very difficult to launch new markets or to put a whole lot of new efforts in when you can't do live tastings and you can't visit retailers and distributors and so on. So like a lot of our peers, what we are doing is we're doing a lot of things virtually. We're trying to really keep our social media presence very prominent with our consumers and really trying to focus in on that effort until things normalize.
That's really helpful. Thank you and wishing you all the best at MGP and, Gus, wishing you well in the next chapter of your life here.
Thanks, Alex. I appreciate it.
Okay, this concludes our Q&A session, I would like to turn the conference back over to David Colo for closing remarks.
Thank you for your interest in our company and for joining us today for our first quarter call. We are certainly pleased with the results this quarter and the continued progress we've made towards implementing our long-term strategic plan. I'm excited for the opportunity to lead this company forward and build on the momentum, culture and solid operating results achieved. I look forward to talking with you again after the second quarter.
The conference is now concluded. Thank you for attending today's presentation. You may now disconnect.
Good morning, and welcome to the MSC Industrial Supply 2020 Second Quarter Conference Call. [Operator Instructions] Please note, this event is being recorded. I would now like to turn the conference over to John Chironna, Vice President of Investor Relations and Treasurer. Please go ahead.
Thank you, and good morning, everyone. Erik Gershwind, our Chief Executive Officer, is on the call with me. We are remote. So bear with us, if the call drops, we will dial back in, of course. During today's call, we will refer to various financial and management data in the presentation slides that accompany our comments as well as our operational statistics, both of which can be found on the Investor Relations section of our website.
Let me reference our safe harbor statement under the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Our comments on this call as well as the supplemental information we are providing on the website contain forward-looking statements within the meaning of the U.S. securities laws, including guidance about expected future results, expectations regarding our ability to gain market share and expected benefits from our investment and strategic plans, including expected results from acquisitions. These forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated by these statements. Information about these risks is noted in our earnings press release and the risk factors in the MD&A sections of our latest annual report on Form 10- K filed with the SEC as well as in our other SEC filings. These risk factors include our comments on the potential impact of COVID-19. These forward-looking statements are based on our current expectations, and the company assumes no obligation to update these statements. Investors are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements.
I'll now turn the call over to Erik.
Thank you, John. Good morning, everybody, and thank you for joining us today during these unprecedented times. Let me begin by expressing my best wishes to you and to your families to stay safe and healthy. COVID-19 is no doubt, top of mind for all of us right now. So before we get into the quarter, let me start by sharing with you an overview of how we're dealing with this issue.
We've launched a company-wide business continuity effort to help us navigate the business through this period of uncertainty. As you can imagine, this is getting our leadership team's full attention right now and we are in constant communication with our stakeholders, our associates, our customers, our suppliers, as we contingency plan for what is likely to be an extended disruption to the economy. Our #1 priority is the health and safety of our associates and their families, our customers and our other partners. So those associates who can do so are working from home, particularly in our corporate functions. As we are an essential business, we are continuing to operate our customer fulfillment centers or distribution centers. So those associates continue to be on-premises, serving our customers. This is particularly important because with timely shipping and some creative sourcing, we are helping to keep the nation's front lines running while we all battle this outbreak. We've instituted enhanced safety procedures to safeguard the health and safety of our team, including the use of additional protective equipment and frequent cleanings of our facilities. Given that we're providing essential services to many organizations on the front lines of the response to COVID-19, we do not have any plans at this time to shut down our customer fulfillment centers. However, we will, of course, follow the guidance of health officials, and we're in close contact with them across our operating footprint.
We have eliminated essentially all travel in order to ensure health and safety. We are also reducing spending more broadly across the company, only moving ahead on operating and capital spending that is deemed critical. We have ceased all hiring, cut expenses on items like outside resources, including consulting and more. Looking ahead, we have well-developed contingency plans to reduce costs further if the situation deteriorates from here as it very well may. I am proud of how our associates have stepped up during this time of unprecedented uncertainty.
Our warehouse associates continue getting product out the door every day. Our sales and service teams remain the face of the company on the front lines with our customers. Our category management team is coming up with miracles to find scarce safety and janitorial products that are keeping our customers going. And our IT team has moved in work speed to enable nearly the entire company with remote access. We'll share some more detail on our actions later in the call, but I'll now turn to our fiscal second quarter that we closed at the end of February.
During the quarter, we continue to progress on our journey to reposition MSC as a mission-critical partner on the plant floor of manufacturing and industrial customers. We remain focused on the 3 initiatives that we've discussed over the last couple of calls, to restore operating margin stability and, ultimately, expansion. And those are: Refining the sales effectiveness plan, improving the profitability of our supplier programs and improving productivity by reducing operating expenses. First, we continued refining the sales force and preparing to accelerate growth. Sales headcount was roughly flat during our fiscal second quarter. Importantly, though, we increased headcount in the growth areas, such as business development or the hunter roles that we've talked about into CCSG and a couple of other investment priorities. Our new business wins continued at a strong pace and remained on plan. While encouraging, we realize that the ultimate measure will be our growth gap above market.
Our second initiative is improving the profitability of our supplier programs. Recall that we have negotiated roughly $20 million in annualized profit improvements, split about equally between the back half of our fiscal '20 and our fiscal 2021. The overall program remains on track. We do expect, however, that COVID-19 and the resulting economic ripple could mute some of the benefit in the near-term as purchase levels and hence rebate payouts come down. The third fiscal 2020 initiative is realigning our operating model to reduce expenses and improve productivity. You'll recall that some of this began at the end of our fiscal 2019 with offering voluntary early retirement to some associates and ratcheting our performance management intensity for others. We also selectively eliminated positions where our focus was changing. All of that continued into our fiscal second quarter, and we began selectively hiring in certain customer- facing roles, as I mentioned.
We also continued our assessment of additional opportunities to align our operating model to the new strategy. That exercise confirmed our hypothesis that we see the path to a couple of hundred basis points and improved productivity, as measured by the OpEx to sales ratio. Many of the identified initiatives require travel and team meetings. So as you could imagine, they're on pause until things settle down. However, there are other initiatives such as some contract improvements and indirect procurement savings that are moving forward as we speak. Our transformation effort is being led by Kari Heerdt.
I'll now turn to our fiscal second quarter financial results before providing an update on the environment and then turning it over to John to review the details of the quarter. Greg Clark, our interim CFO, is under the weather right now and out of an abundance of caution, staying home. I would note that he and his team have been doing a great job in finance as expected. We'll then wrap up and open things up for questions.
Our fiscal second quarter results reflected solid execution in an uncertain environment. Both sales and gross margins came within our guidance ranges, with sales falling below the midpoint while gross margin was above it. Operating expenses were also better than the guidance midpoint. And this was despite an extra roughly $1 million of consulting fees related to the acceleration of the review of our operating model that I mentioned earlier. All told, both our operating margin and earnings per share came in at the midpoint of our guidance range.
Turning to the environment. Industrial demand trends overall for the quarter remained relatively soft. We did start to see a couple of encouraging data points with January and February MBI readings improving to 50.2. But this was, of course, quickly erased by what unfolded with the COVID-19 outbreak, and you no doubt saw the March reading of 41.0, which did not surprise us. In terms of end markets, the weakness in industrial demand broadened further with pockets of softness in areas like automotive, heavy truck, oil and gas and agriculture. Aerospace has also weakened due to the Boeing developments and the building concerns around COVID-19.
With regard to the pricing environment, we continue to see list price movements from our suppliers, and we took a midyear price increase at the beginning of our fiscal third quarter or the beginning of March. Realization has been quite good. In fact, as good as anything we've seen over the past several years.
Turning to our performance by customer type. National accounts declined in the low single digits, while core customers declined in the mid-single digits, as this is the portion of our business most heavily levered to metalworking, so no surprise. Government sales growth levels deteriorated to down low teens, which weighed down the overall growth. CCSG remained a bright spot, growing in the low single digits. To be honest, though, all of that feels like ancient history.
I'll now turn to March, our fiscal March, because it is more reflective of what we're seeing since the acceleration of COVID-19. While our fiscal March's sales estimate came in at negative 5.8% overall, there are a few important trends to note under the surface. First, there's a big discrepancy between the first 3 weeks and the last 2. Through 3 weeks, our revenues were up low single digits over prior year. We then saw a big drop-off in the last 2 weeks as customer shutdowns spread rapidly across the nation. This began with the big 3 auto shutdowns and accelerated from there. And I'll just remind you that our last week of March actually runs in given the fiscal calendar runs into April, so included the first 3 days of April.
The second point I'd note is that we saw a big discrepancy in product line performance. Large orders and sales of safety and janitorial products, not surprisingly surged over prior year, particularly with our government customers. At the same time, other product lines saw a substantial drop-through the month with double-digit sales declines in the last 2 weeks. Once again, neither is surprising given the shutdowns and worldwide efforts to control COVID-19.
Third thing I'll note, we saw an unusually big gap between our bookings or orders and what we invoiced. Normally, on these calls, we only discuss revenues, but these are not normal times. Our bookings or orders for March were up high single digits over the prior year. In fact, our bookings were up over prior year even during the last 2 weeks of our fiscal March. This gap in bookings versus revenues actually began in February, where we also saw bookings growth over prior year. The unusually large gap in bookings to revenues is a function of the surge in large safety and janitorial orders, scarcity of some of that product, longer supplier lead times and a larger-than-normal backlog in our own warehouses. We anticipate the majority of these bookings to invoice during the months of April, May and June, which would offer us a growth tailwind to buffer any additional softness that may be yet to come.
I'll now turn things over to John, and I'll then come back with some concluding remarks.
Thank you, Erik. So let me get right into the Q2 numbers. Our total average daily sales were $12.9 million, a decrease of 2.9% on an ADS basis versus the same quarter last year. MSC Mexico contributed approximately 90 basis points of acquisitive growth in the quarter. The decrease in overall ADS was 40 basis points below the negative 2.5% midpoint of our guidance range. Our Q2 reported gross margin was 42.1%, 10 basis points above the midpoint of our guidance range, reflecting higher vendor rebates. Versus prior year, gross margin was down roughly 60 basis points, with Mexico accounting for roughly half of the decline. As expected, the year-over-year gross margin decline continued shrinking as purchase cost escalation continued to wane. March showed nice gross margin performance due to the benefit of strong price realization.
Total operating expenses in Q2 were $253 million, slightly lower-than-expected as a percentage of sales. I'll point out that OpEx included about $2 million of productivity investments related to the review of our operating model that Erik mentioned earlier. $1 million of this expense was in our Q2 guidance, while the other $1 million was due to the acceleration of that work. As Erik mentioned, we are slowing our spend on this type of work right now, but we expect to resume it once COVID-19 is behind us. Therefore, should these expenses become more material going forward, we will break them out of our reported earnings to provide you additional visibility.
Moving on, our operating margin was 9.9% versus guidance of 9.7%. Our tax rate for the first quarter was 25.1%, in line with guidance and the prior year. All of this resulted in earnings per share of $1. Normally, we would take you through the balance sheet at this point in the discussion. However, today, I'd like to focus on where we are as of now and the actions that we are taking to ensure business resilience and continuity during this time of uncertainty. The Q2 balance sheet numbers are in our press release and the 10-Q filing, and we are, of course, happy to answer any questions that you may have about where we stood at the end of Q2.
With the downturn in sales that we saw in the last 2 weeks of March, we are managing our liquidity very closely, and we drew down $300 million from our revolving credit facility to ensure greater liquidity. On the receivables side of the business, we have been managing the credit approval process closely. Most new customers are being pushed toward credit card payments, and we are carefully allocating inventory to existing customers. We have implemented noncancellation policies on most large orders and collections have remained relatively strong. Most of -- many of the large orders are coming from long-standing government customers. When it comes to inventory, we are watching our levels closely, but you have heard us say before that in difficult times, we will use our inventory levels as a competitive differentiator. And remember, booking levels have remained strong through March. Should the environment weaken further, we can and will adjust quickly. In fact, we have already made several adjustments to take down buying levels. And assuming volumes remain suppressed, we'll continue doing so in order to bring inventory levels down.
On the payables side, we continue paying on a timely basis, particularly those suppliers that give us good terms and a preferential position. Those suppliers offering timely delivery and deep discounts will be pushed to the front of the line.
Turning to our ordinary dividend. We have ample liquidity to continue running the business and paying the current level of our dividend in all but the most severe scenarios. We have conducted numerous best and worst-case sensitivity analysis, and revenues would have to decline somewhere in the range of 40% to 50% before our operating cash flow turn negative. At these levels, we would take additional cost down actions and could sustain multiple quarters given our liquidity position.
I'll now turn it back over to Erik.
Thanks, John. Given the unprecedented uncertainty that we're all facing right now, including the lack of visibility that we have going forward and just how fast things are changing, we do not think that quarterly guidance would provide much value. However, we understand the need for transparency right now for all of our stakeholders, including our investors and analysts. So until we get through this period of heightened uncertainty, we'll be providing monthly updates on average daily sales developments as quickly as possible following our month end close as well as comments on the business trends that we've seen over the course of the month.
I'll offer some closing thoughts. Our focus right now is on navigating the impact of COVID-19. I'm confident that we're doing the right things to protect the health and safety of our associates, to continue serving our customers in this critical time and to play our part in keeping the manufacturing economy running. I thank our entire team for this and I extend this appreciation to our customers and our supply chain partners, who've all come together to address the challenges that all of us face. While the impact of COVID-19 on the industrial economy will likely get worse before it gets better, things will ultimately get better. MSC has been through difficult times before. And we will lean on our time-tested playbook, anchoring ourselves in our mission statement and our values. We will continue supporting our customers and our suppliers through these tough times, while advancing our strategy to become mission-critical on the plant floor. Finally, our strong balance sheet, our culture and resolve mean that MSC will not only survive, but we will ultimately emerge from this as a stronger company. We'll now open up the line for questions.
[Operator Instructions] The first question today comes from Ryan Merkel of William Blair.
So first off, I want to get a better sense of the sales trend line through March and into early April. You said the first 3 weeks of March were up low single digits, but I'm wondering what happened in the last 2 weeks? And is the trend line getting a whole lot worse? And really, I'm just reaching for any kind of read on how bad April could be.
Yes. Ryan, sure. So as we mentioned, yes, March first 3 weeks, and what I'll do is split the discussion out into invoicing and then the booked orders, which, as I mentioned, usually, we don't talk about on this call, but these are certainly unusual times. Invoicing first 3 weeks average low single digits. You can do the math, but the last 2 weeks dropped into the double digits. I wouldn't say it was progressively falling through those last 2 weeks. And the other thing I'd note, Ryan, is, for us, April, that last week in March for us included 3 days of April. So you're getting a taste for April. And I wouldn't call out any discernible difference between week 4 and week 5 in March. We are now in the first week of our fiscal April. So we literally have 2 days under our belt. And for the 2 days for what it's worth, I wouldn't call out anything different from the prior 2 weeks of note. That's the invoicing side.
On the bookings side, as we mentioned, Ryan, what's interesting, and I call it out because being in this business forever, it's the thing that I usually look at as my leading indicator for how we're doing. Bookings were -- we said for the month, up high single digit, certainly stronger the first 3 weeks. But even those last 2 weeks of the fiscal month, year-on-year, we're up. Which, obviously, what that would mean as long as those orders come through, and we believe most will, the invoicing will catch up and will provide a buffer. So that would be the color I'd give you through the month.
Okay. So yes, the bottom line is it's not -- sales aren't falling off dramatically here in the last, call it, 7 to 10 days. I think is what I kind of feel...
I mean, certainly, relative to the first 3 weeks, a big step down, but I wouldn't say -- between the 2 weeks of week 4 and week 5 of March, which again crept into April, I wouldn't see it as trend line straight down, correct.
Okay. And then a follow-up there, I probably could do the math, but can you quantify the sales that are on back order as of March? And I assume this has continued into April as well. I mean, how big could the backorder get?
Hard to give you a number, but I mean just -- you could -- as you said, Ryan, just think about the difference between high single-digit on the order side and then a minus 5.8 on the invoicing side. That's quite a bit of dollars.
Yes. Okay. And then just lastly...
And a lot of that -- as I said, a lot of that we expect to build out over the coming 3 months.
Right. Right, right, right. Okay. And then just lastly, and I'll turn it over, a question on decremental margins. This quarter, decremental margins were about 50%, and sales were down 4%. I'm not sure if this is representative, but any help you could provide on decremental margins for the next 2 quarters, assuming sales are down 10%, maybe 20%?
I'll take that, Ryan. This is John. I think you followed us a long time, right, of course. So we've talked about incremental margins in -- over history being in the 20% to 30% range. Based on the modeling we're doing, I'd say that our decremental margins would be in a similar range on the downside, obviously, let's call it, low 20s to low 30s. And as you can imagine, there's a lot of moving parts there, right? So things like gross margin performance, mix, the size and timing of cost actions and quite a few number of other factors. But I think low 20s to low 30s would put you in the right range.
Your next question today comes from John Inch of Gordon Haskett.
And hopefully, Greg just has a cold.
He is doing okay. Just...
I understand, better to be safe than sorry. Can we maybe put a finer point around the magnitude of personal protective equipment, janitorial? What normally do these categories represent, Erik, in terms of the mix? And what are you actually seeing today? And I'm just trying to dovetail that with the fact that government, despite the surge in orders is still only 7% of the total revenues in the fiscal second quarter, kind of flat sequentially. Is there a way you could sort of size these buckets for us proportionally versus kind of what it normally is?
Yes. Look, John, you're honing right in on a couple of the big changes that we saw. It's almost -- it was funny because I looked back at the numbers and noticed the same thing that if you look at Q2, you don't see much of a difference at all in government. You're right at 7%. [ Q2 ] which ended in February, almost feels like a different world. We are -- if we look ahead, based on the order activity and early invoicing activity for government, we would certainly expect that number to jump up considerably. John, part of the challenge here is the timing of when these orders actually hit. It's tough for me to give you a number, but suffice it to say, I'd be surprised if government as a percentage of sales did not take a meaningful jump in our Q3.
Your other question was a product one and related to, let's say, PPE, the 2 product lines, safety and janitorial. What I would say there is quietly over the years, we've built up a really strong safety business. Metalworking far and away, the biggest category, we've sort of colored that for you. The second biggest being the Class C parts, and we've kind of colored that for you. Behind those two, this would be the next biggest category. It's been growing for years. It has also floated, as you could imagine. So if we look at the sort of the order activity in the past month, 6 weeks versus the prior run rate, multiples bigger than it was. So again, I'd be surprised if moving forward, we didn't see a big jump up as a percentage of revenues.
Right. So it sounds like you're saying those 2 categories combined maybe historically were in the teens. And then if you -- we're probably going to see a big surge on top of that. I think that makes sense.
It wouldn't be box cars. John, one interesting note, by the way, that I'll call out is, look, it's not surprising that there's demand for products, safety products and janitorial products in this environment. I think the real trick and the secret sauce, and I think where we're having some success is finding sources of supply. Because supply is so limited. And I gave a shout out to our category team, but I do think we've developed a lot of relationships over the years, have a lot of good sourcing capabilities, and it's given us access to tap into sources that maybe others can't. And hopefully, that will give us an opportunity to take advantage and help a lot of people out.
Yes. Maybe you can pass along those skills to the federal government. Wondering about -- so I'm just going to give a specific example. Honeywell issued a letter to its suppliers. This is in its performance materials business, basically imposing a 30% price cut on procured products across the board. Are you seeing -- it's obviously an extreme case. I understand maintenance repair operating supplies are going to be different than their components and other feedstocks that go into that product line. But are you seeing pressure similarly from, say, your national account customers to renegotiate various contracts or pretty good, right, and the acceptance of the price increase seemed to be pretty good. I'm just wondering, though, on the look forward, as a lot of companies get stressed and national accounts are obviously very important for you. What kind of early reads are you getting from your customer base? And how do you think kind of MSC is going to fare through all of this?
Yes, really good question again. Here's what I'd say, John. So first off, let me just comment briefly on our price realization. I flagged it because it has been better than expected. And that was because -- we actually implemented -- it wasn't a total surprise. I mean, we made a few, I would call it, improvements to our execution on the pricing front between our pricing team and our sales team, and those are paying off. I think those should sustain based on the results I'm seeing and how they're tracking back to actions we took. So I like what I'm seeing there. In terms of the environment, it's an interesting dynamic, John. Because on the one hand, certainly, you're going to have companies who are feeling a lot of financial pressure and are going to look to take cost out. That will be there. No question. The flip side is, this is a bit different, kind of a typical recession in many ways. But one way is scarcity of product and access to key products. So there's certain areas where customers just want to be able to get product in the door to keep their people safe and keep their operations going. So it's a bit different from your typical recession. So those would be kind of competing factors. Net-net, so far, no reason -- I'm not seeing anything that would lead me to believe pricing realization should decline from here.
Got it. Just maybe one last one. In the cash flow, inventory was a large sequential drag, and I guess, payables were a large sequential source. What are you seeing with respect to your working capital? Are customers -- are they slower to pay, in turn, are you sort of -- you mentioned you're actually paying on time. I mean, how are you guys thinking about managing working capital? And what are your expectations in terms of how the resources are used in the coming, in the coming quarters, particularly if sales, obviously, this is going to be the toughest quarter. We hope it's only the toughest quarter for top line, right, in the June quarter -- I mean, second calendar quarter.
Yes. Let me take that, John. As you can imagine, we're watching our working capital and our cash flows extremely closely on every single day. I get reports first thing in the morning. We -- our receivables so far have been remarkably, relatively strong, I would say, as -- in our payables. We've kept up because the world at least, if you look at the numbers, the world is not falling apart yet. But that's why we're watching it very, very closely, right? From an inventory standpoint, as you know, we typically, as a distributor, generate a lot of cash in a downturn because of inventories. You wouldn't have seen that coming into the Q2 because our fiscal Q2, of course, straddled year-end, which is when we typically take advantage of opportunity buys, right? And then that, plus the fact that our bookings were very positive towards the end of February and through March, and combine that as well with our commitment to have product available to our customers, it means we want to keep inventory on the shelf and keep using that as a big differentiator. Lastly, I'll add that safety and janitorial supply is very limited, so we're going to buy all we can of those kind of products. But at the end of the day, if the environment weakens further, we can and we will adjust inventories quickly and draw them down and generate a lot more cash.
Our next question today comes from Hamzah Mazari of Jefferies.
My first question, and you touched on this, Erik, a little bit in your prepared remarks, but I know it's early, high level operationally, strategy wise, culturally, do you see this as changing your business positively or negatively? Any high level thoughts?
Hamzah, I mean, another great question. I got to tell you, it's still -- it's something that's beginning to cross my mind, but I would say still -- we are so early in this, Hamzah. And so much is yet to be determined about how long we're in this sort of new normal, what the new normal means and how long before we're back. What I would tell you is it's a bit early to say. The one thing that I would flag is just -- it's been amazing to me to see our culture. So this is sort of more of a right brain thing than a left brain thing, right? But to see our culture in action and to see people rally around the company, rally to support each other, rally to support customers and suppliers, it's been invigorating. And there's been a real sort of surge and renaissance in the culture, if you will, watching our whole team in action and seeing us kind of adhere to the values that we've always adhered to, seeing how we take a long-term perspective. So the one thing I'd call out is a positive from that standpoint that in the face of adversity, I like what I'm seeing from how we're responding. Beyond that, I think a little too early to say.
Erik, and Hamzah, I would add that our model of distributing goods and products directly to the customer really works well in this environment. We -- if they want us there, we can be there with our full-service and solutions. But if they don't, we can ship our goods right to their docks and they can keep operating without us having to come into the premises.
Got it. And just a follow-up. How do you balance sort of liquidity and potentially distressed assets out there where maybe you can do M&A? I know you are excited. Last quarter, the bar on M&A is higher. You're sort of going through a restructuring still but now sort of the world has changed a little bit. Is the M&A sort of bar still pretty high? Or does that change because you may have a lot of distressed companies out there that may fit your book of business?
So Hamzah, what I would say is, for now, the bar on M&A is still very high, especially in this environment. Look, we feel really good about our liquidity position. And John sort of ran through a framework with you to give you a sense as to why. And then you think about how this business normally performs in a downturn with working capital as we were touching on with John earlier. So we feel good about our liquidity position. There's going to be opportunities that emerge here for sure, and there is going to be opportunities to invest. And whether that's in people or systems or companies, just not yet. And certainly, as it relates to M&A, given where we're at, the answer is for now, certainly, the bar remains high.
Our next question today comes from Sam Darkatsh of Raymond James.
Erik, John, I hope both of you and your families are well. Two questions, if I might. One of them is a piggyback on a prior question around your receivables collection. One of the things -- I mean, we're all looking at '08, '09, at least for a guidepost in terms of what might happen. One of the things I found interesting was that your allowance for doubtful accounts never really spiked in '08, '09. It got to about 4% of gross receivables, which is really not all that dissimilar from where you're at now. Erik, help us or remind us as to why allowances don't spike or at least historically don't spike in recessions. Is it something to do with your customer list? Is it something how you tactically go to COD? And how might you look at receivables collectability in a worst-case scenario if this thing does drag on?
Yes, sure. I mean, I'm happy to give you some historic perspective, and John can weigh in on how we're managing it now. But look, I think Sam, we manage it tightly all the time. We're managing it more tightly now. And what that means is having very proactive, good relationships with customers, long-standing relationships with customers. And so there's dialogue going on all the time. And that, combined with making some sort of common sense moves, as John referenced. So if there's going to be a new customer coming in that we're not familiar with, move that to credit card payment. When it comes to large orders, we're making sure that it's with good, long-standing customers with good payment track records. In some cases, noncancellation policies. So doing some common sense things and then I think leveraging a lot of years of good relationships.
John, I don't know if you have anything to add?
The other thing I would point out, I guess, Sam, is the '08, '09 crisis was pretty sharp and pretty quick. Right now, with COVID, we really don't know. It's building a little momentum, but so far, it's not as bad as it could get. Now we drew down $300 million on our revolver, as I said, to preserve liquidity so that we have that cash. We haven't had to use it really yet. So it was the right thing to do. we feel for our company, but we are -- we'll continue watching receivables very, very closely.
My last question, and this might be granular, but you've got a very technically proficient sales force that retention is going to be quite critical. I'm guessing you're considering this a fixed cost or at least largely a fixed cost. How are you specifically addressing variable comp with salespeople over the next few months to maintain retention levels?
President, CEO & Director lines, our salespeople. You can imagine, Sam, a sensitive one from a competitive standpoint. But suffice it to say, that we are taking environmental factors into account as we look at variable comp and making sure that inside the company, we have a mantra about doing the right thing. And when it comes to our salespeople, we're doing the right thing. I'll kind of leave it at that. But just to say, we are proactively addressing the issue.
The next question today comes from Adam Uhlman of Cleveland Research.
I wanted to -- I had a couple of gross margin questions for you. When we think about safety products and government business, I guess I would have thought that, that would be softer gross margin-type product for the company, maybe not in total. But John, you had mentioned that March gross margin performance was pretty good with the price increase. I'm wondering if you could just mention for us the margin profile of that business as some of those orders start to come through.
Adam, yes. So what I would say on gross margin is you sort of have different -- there's always -- gross margin is always kind of like a series with some tailwinds and headwinds. What we called out was a tailwind was the price increase we took and the strong realization. So as we look forward, certainly, that's a tailwind. As it relates to -- and it's one of the reasons, by the way, what you're hitting on is one of the reasons why trying to give guidance now would be so fruitless and difficult because one of the other factors that influences gross margin is price, its cost and its mix. And John described how on 2 of the 3 factors, cost is starting to move in the right direction. He talked about it in the prepared remarks. Pricing is moving in the right direction we talked about. Mix is a real wildcard right now. And it just is so hard because to predict, because of the timing and the size of some of these orders. Our approach to pricing a lot of this business has been to do it just as we've always done it, consistent with how we priced it 2 months ago before there was a crisis. So yes, in some cases, some of those orders are going to come in below company average. In some cases, they'll come in at or above. Very difficult, but you are right, what it could make for us is a little choppiness as it relates to mix.
Yes. I would just add in, Adam, I think we've -- over the years, we've at least alluded, if not said directly that government sales are typically lower than the company average gross margin, just like national account sales are as well. So yes, that would be a headwind. I don't know. We haven't -- we certainly haven't broken out various product gross margins. So I won't go there on the janitor and safety stuff.
Okay. And then could you dimension the magnitude of the price increase? Remind us what that was?
It was in the neighborhood of 1% to 2%, I'd say. It was definitely smaller than last year's midyear increase.
Okay. Got you. And then the supplier programs, Erik, that you had mentioned at the beginning of the call that some of them are potentially at risk with volume-related rebates. I'm just wondering how much of this do we think could stay -- I think I heard you say the majority of it that might have misheard. Any directional sense? And then just for the accounting of that, is that accrued for as we move through the rest of the year or we start accruing for that in the fourth quarter?
Yes, Adam. And just to be clear on the supplier programs, the programs are all intact. And in fact, I think at a time like this, we need our suppliers and our suppliers need us, we need to lean on each other. Programs are all intact, no change. So the only change I flagged, Adam, is that if you look forward and if a decent portion of the benefits were in the form of guaranteed rebates, let's say, a guaranteed rebate gets paid back to dollar one of purchases. Obviously, if purchases come down, if there's an extended period of economic slowdown and purchases come down, the absolute dollar levels of the program will come down. That's what I was trying to get across. In terms of when you'd start to see that the way the accrual works for the rebate, John, I believe it will begin in our fiscal fourth quarter and move through the rest of the calendar year. And again, it's one of those things, Adam, where it's so hard to predict because it's supplier by supplier, and in some cases, to the extent that they're safety suppliers, you can imagine, purchases are going to be through the roof. If it's somewhere else, it's going to be lower. So it's really tricky to model out. But I flagged it because it likely could be a headwind if there's a protracted downturn.
The next question today comes from David Manthey of Baird.
First, Erik, you indicated that you increased headcount in the hunter role during the second quarter. And obviously, as a company, you're playing a lot of defense right now. But can you tell us how you'll keep the mission-critical partner strategy moving forward during the crisis and then even potentially several weak quarters thereafter? How do you keep the wheels in motion there?
Yes, Dave, good question. So what -- yes, I did mention our hunter -- so the BD or the Hunter role was the part of the business where we were really throttling up and we've been seeing good success in capturing new customer relationships or expanding what was a small relationship into a big relationship. In some ways, it sounds crazy, but the whole mission-critical concept that I'm seeing this now in sort of the cultural surge inside the company that I've talked about, becomes more important than ever. Businesses -- many of our customers are considered essential businesses. And they need to keep their operations running in some way, shape or form. So the way we deliver on this promise is -- the idea of being mission-critical means, we're there with you. We're there with you on the plant floor. We're there with you to solve your toughest problems. We've had to adapt a little bit because in some cases, maybe we're not actually inside the customer shop, and we're doing this virtually by phone. But I think it's giving us a chance to bring the value prop and this new strategy alive in a new and exciting way. I mean, we're helping keeping operations going.
Okay. And then in past downturns, MSC has invested aggressively into the decline in some cases. Is it just too early to make that call Erik? Do you wait till we go past the coronavirus and then see what the economy looks like thereafter before you make that call?
Dave, I think it's a little bit early. I do think that there's going to be some good opportunities that emerge, and we would take a consistent approach in terms of looking and being on our toes and capitalizing on those opportunities, I think, just not yet.
The next question today comes from Michael McGinn of Wells Fargo.
If I could start off with the SG&A initiatives, the direct savings, the T&E, consulting, discretionary spend and Capex, can you put a -- are you able to put a dollar figure to that, what the first tranche? And then maybe if things get progressively a bit worse, what would a second tranche look like?
Sure. Sure. So yes, you've hit on. I mean, we've taken pretty much the basic moves out early, I think. We have taken out -- call it stuff, you're looking for a range somewhere in the neighborhood of $500,000 a week run rate wise that we have taken out through the actions that we talked about earlier. Certainly, we're ready if we need to, to take out more cost. There would be significantly more cost out to come. The way we would do that, at some point, depending upon how bad things get, some of the actions begin to to lean on our mission statement, our values, our track record and do things in a way back to the mantra of doing the right thing. That's how we would go about doing it. And I'm going to lean on the playbook that my predecessor, David Sandler years ago, navigated us brilliantly through '08, '09, and it was all about our team sharing in pain collectively and leading from the top, and we would take very much the same approach if we need to go deeper.
Got it. Appreciate the color. And if I could just switch gears to more of a long-term question. If this ends up being -- having some effect down the line towards social distancing. How are you looking to the future for your spec sales? You guys have always done these in-shop studies. You should be using X product instead of Y, you get better turns, you'll get better efficiency and you lower your cost with this product. From a spec sales standpoint, are you able to do that virtual online sharing of CAD documents or whatever it may be? How do you look at that long term?
That's a great question. So 2 things I'd say. One is that, John mentioned it earlier. If this sort of became the new normal or the new normal for a long period of time, are -- let's start with our logistics model, I think, really lends itself well to this world because it is a centralized model shipping into remote locations, relatively low touch. So I think that works out really well. In terms of the engineered side of the value proposition, the mission-critical part, look, what I would say is we're going to use technology. And we've actually been using technology for quite a while. So we have, in certain locations, a lot of our tech team, believe it or not, actually sits in centralized call center environments and provides just as deep technical expertise and advice and does it over the phone or with FaceTime and with technology. I think what would happen is we would take that model and we would expand upon that for bigger customers. So certainly, it would be different, but not something we're unaccustomed to.
Okay. If I could sneak 1 more in on the discrepancy versus invoices versus orders. Is there a way to disaggregate what has come in from an order standpoint that isn't from that large government customer that may be that smaller shop of 20 employees that is potentially more at risk at shutting down? What has the order flow been for those high demand products thus far?
Yes. So we do, Mike, we looked at it 10 ways till Sunday by -- for the invoicing and for the orders coming in. What I would say is, look, there's some of everything coming in, but the majority, the concentration of the large orders would be from a product standpoint, safety and janitory related. And then from a customer segment, there are certainly some coming from smaller shops, but the majority would be between government customers and our larger national accounts would be where the bulk of them are coming from.
The next question today comes from Patrick Baumann of JP Morgan.
Maybe just kind of circling back on some of the earlier discussion. If you could help us understand the -- on decremental margins, the kind of the key variables in that low 20s to low 30s framework? Is it a certain range of sales declines? Is it -- maybe how do you expect gross margins to behave in that kind of think high level about that framework and what are the variables?
So Pat, we looked at numerous scenarios from 10% to 20% down and further beyond that, obviously, areas where we're nowhere near today. But we -- I think that, that general range of low 20s to low 30s worked pretty much all the way down and even towards the worst scenarios we could -- we modeled, at least, let's say. So I wouldn't get into the details of gross margins and all that. But that's the best we can do, I think, with the modeling that we did so far, unless Erik, do you have anything to add?
Yes. Maybe just 2 comments, John. So I think that range of low 20s to low 30s. The reason for the broad range is actually one of the biggest factors, Pat, you're hitting on is gross margin. It's hard to predict how it performs. So you can imagine the better gross margin does, the closer we get to the low 20s and the worst to the low 30s. The only other thing I'd call out, and I think Ryan in the initial question asked this, the decrementals actually looked worse over the last year than the range we gave. Obviously, what that range is reflective of is considerable actions being taken by the company. So what you're seeing at the various levels to be able to keep to the low 20s to low 30s is there's significant cost actions being taken beyond what we've done over the past year. And then the gross margin would be the driver behind the size of the range.
Okay. Got it. That's helpful. And I guess, maybe going back to -- I don't know if it was Ryan's question earlier, somebody was asking about March sales, but -- so February was down 4% to 5%, but you saw March improved to low single digits in the first 3 weeks. Just what drove that improvement? Was that all the safety and janitorial stuff? Is that what drove kind of that step-up versus February?
Actually, the improvement in the step-up was -- because a lot of the safety and janitorial stuff ended up being back ordered or direct ship, and it's why there's this building gap between bookings and invoices. And we actually saw broad-based relative strength. I mean, if you call low single-digit strength. Relative strength from where it was more broad-based. Trying to parse out why, one theory is just in times of uncertainty, customers wanted to, whether it's safety product or not buy up a little bit. We also -- so I would say that's probably the biggest factor, but it was more broad-based.
Okay. And then just last one, back to that question earlier as well. If I run that quick back of the envelope on low single-digit growth in the first 3 weeks and what that implies for the last 2 weeks, I get to something like, I don't know, mid-teens or so declines. Is that in the ballpark of what you saw kind of at the end of the month?
Somewhere in the ballpark. And the only other color there would be not much of a difference between week 4 and week 5.
And our last question today comes from Steve Barger of KeyBanc Capital Markets.
Just going back to some of the conversations around delivering the value proposition. I wanted to ask how customer attitude towards vending and VMI are changing. Is there more interest given better control and tracking? Or do they want more delivery to dock to limit access to facilities?
Interesting question, Steve. What I would say is two things. One, it's a little early to say. This is so brand new. Two, we've had competing dynamics. So on the one hand, right now, a good portion of our customers have either shut down, and that's somewhere, by the way, based on our latest data, and the data keeps changing, around 20% or so, a little over 20% of our customers have shut down. And then another chunk of customers are operating but have restricted access to any visitors from the outside. So when we think about how often we're actually going in and replenishing a vending or VMI installation right now, it's somewhere in the 40% to 50% range. So certainly -- and look, we think that's temporary. Temporary that's down. The flip side has been -- believe it or not, and this surprised us, the number of like new VMI implementations, for instance, that we did a week or 2 ago, was one of the highest we've ever done, which really surprised us. So it's a little bit of a mixed bag right now. I think temporarily, though, what you're seeing is customers restricting access, which may -- if they're not shutting down, restricting access. So we're enabling them. We're giving them the technology and the tools to be able to replenish on their own if they need to temporarily.
Yes. And I'm sure that of that 20% that shuts down, a lot of those are metalworking customers in the automotive supply chain or something. Just any more commentary on how demand for those products progressed in the back half of March? And where do you think inventory levels are with your customers and in your own systems, given we are seeing some decelerating trends in metalworking already.
So first part of your question, you are correct. In terms of closures everywhere, but acute in the Midwest related to auto, no question. You are correct there. In terms of customer inventory levels, look, they definitely -- they've been building, but it's really hard to say because -- especially when it comes to some of these large orders, it's almost like there's not enough to be had. So we're getting these huge quantities. And even when they're being fulfilled, customers are coming back and saying, we need more. It's really hard to judge. A lot -- just a murky time.
This concludes our question-and-answer session. I would like to turn the conference back over to John Chironna for any closing remarks.
Thank you, Melissa, and thank you, everyone, for joining us today. Our next earnings date is set for July 8, 2020. As Erik mentioned, we will be providing interim monthly updates. We will do this via press release within a week or so of our monthly close. So expect the update for April developments just after the first week in May. I want to thank you for joining us today. And more importantly, please stay healthy and safe. Take care.
The conference has now concluded. Thank you for attending today's presentation. You may now disconnect.
As part of the discussion today, the representatives from NTIC will be making certain forward-looking statements regarding NTIC's future financial and operating results as well as their business plans, objectives and expectations. Please be advised that these forward-looking statements are covered under the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 and that NTIC desires to avail itself of the protections of the safe harbor for these statements.
Please also be advised that actual results could differ materially from those stated or implied by the forward-looking statements due to certain risks and uncertainties, including those described in NTIC's most recent annual report on Form 10-K, subsequent quarterly reports on Form 10-Q and recent press releases. Please read these reports and other future filings that NTIC will make with the SEC. NTIC disclaims any duty to update or revise its forward-looking statements.
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for standing by, and welcome to the second quarter 2020 earnings conference call. [Operator Instructions] Please be advised that today's conference is being recorded. [Operator Instructions]
I would now like to hand the conference over to your speaker today, Patrick Lynch, CEO. Thank you. Please go ahead, sir.
Good morning. I'm Patrick Lynch, NTIC's CEO, and I'm here with Matt Wolsfeld, NTIC's CFO; as well as Vineet Dalal, Vice President and Director of Global Market Development for our Natur-Tec business. Please note that the financial results for our fiscal 2020 second quarter were included in a press release issued earlier this morning, a copy of which is available at ntic.com.
During this call, we will review various key aspects of our fiscal 2020 second quarter financial results, provide a brief business update and then conclude with a question-and-answer session.
Our fiscal 2020 second quarter financial results were significantly influenced by the economic and business impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. When compared to either the second quarter last fiscal year or the first quarter of fiscal 2020, demand for ZERUST industrial products slowed substantially in North America, China and across our joint venture network. Demand for Natur-Tec compostable bioplastics, however, remained comparable to the prior fiscal year quarter, and Zerust Oil & Gas sales increased significantly as several delayed projects from our first quarter were installed during the second quarter.
With many of our global customers currently running at a fraction of their regular capacity or locked down altogether, we anticipate sales for our third quarter to be down considerably compared to the prior fiscal year quarter. Furthermore, since the COVID-19 crisis continues and is evolving, we are withdrawing and suspending specific full year fiscal 2020 guidance. On behalf of the entire leadership team and the Board of Directors of NTIC, our thoughts are with anyone who has been affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. While we have had to adjust our near-term priorities, our long-term market opportunities and growth strategies remain intact.
Our current intent is to continue providing uninterrupted order fulfillment and customer service while ensuring the safety of our customers, joint ventures and employees. Overall, we are entering this period of uncertainty from a position of strength as a result of our asset-light and highly profitable business model, experienced leadership team and excellent capital structure. We currently have over $12 million in cash and cash equivalents and available-for-sale securities. Additionally, we are evaluating the availability of government support programs associated with the CARES Act that was signed into law on March 27, 2020.
So with this overview, let's examine the drivers for the second quarter. For the second quarter ended February 29, 2020, total consolidated net sales decreased 0.6% to $13.2 million as compared to the second quarter ended February 28, 2019. Broken down by business unit, this included a 198.6% increase in Zerust Oil & Gas sales and a 0.3% increase in Natur-Tec net sales offset by a 4.2% decrease in ZERUST industrial net sales and a 65.4% decrease in net sales from NTIC to its ZERUST joint ventures.
Total net sales by our joint ventures, which we do not consolidate in our financial statements, were $24.3 million for the fiscal 2020 second quarter compared to $27.7 million for the same period last fiscal year. This 12.5% decline in joint venture net sales was, at first, the result of already softening worldwide demand across many of the industrial markets we serve and then later in the quarter was compounded by the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Net sales by our wholly owned NTIC China subsidiary increased 0.6% to $3 million for the fiscal 2020 second quarter compared to the same period last fiscal year. NTIC China benefited from higher sales earlier in the second quarter prior to Chinese New Year and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. NTIC China sales had returned to 75% of pre-pandemic levels last month, and we are cautiously optimistic that they will return to 100% of the sales -- of the prior sales level by the end of the third quarter as China has recently restarted its economy and lifted business restrictions previously imposed to mitigate the spread of COVID-19. Overall, we remain optimistic about the long-term potential in China as we intend to further expand our presence within this large and growing market.
As expected, Zerust Oil & Gas sales increased significantly during the second quarter as a result of several customers having delayed product shipments from our first quarter. However, oil and gas sales remained volatile primarily due to long sales cycles, overall challenging market conditions and the timing of orders and deliveries.
The Russia-Saudi Arabia oil price war and the COVID-19 pandemic have had a significant impact on oil prices, with the latter impacting our ability to travel to customer sites and to install our solutions. We expect that oil and gas sales will be materially impacted for the duration of the COVID-19 crisis. We remain committed to the oil and gas market and believe we will be successful over time as more oil and gas customers adopt our solutions and replace other forms of corrosion protection.
Now let me turn the call over to Vineet to review our Natur-Tec bioplastics business in more detail.
Thank you, Patrick. I'm happy to join today's call to review our Natur-Tec business in more detail. I've been a member of NTIC's leadership team for nearly 16 years. And for most of my time at the company, I've focused on Natur-Tec. In addition to my Natur-Tec responsibilities, I also sit on the Board of the Biodegradable Products Institute, a U.S.-based organization that promotes the adoption and use of compostable plastics.
Natur-Tec has become a leader in the bioplastics industry as a result of our patented and proprietary technologies. Natur-Tec creates 100% compostable plastics alternatives with performance characteristics comparable to those of conventional single-use plastics at a price that is affordable and competitive. Over the years, we have also formed important partnerships with key feedstock suppliers and developed strong relationships with key converters and brands around the globe. Over the past years, societal and political criticism due to the environmental and waste disposal concerns of conventional single-use plastics have driven significant interest in and demand for alternatives, which has created a compelling global market environment for Natur-Tec's bio-based and compostable product solutions. We believe the industry dynamics for bioplastics is sustainable as more countries as well as state and local municipalities are putting in place sustainable waste management initiatives.
For the fiscal 2020 second quarter, Natur-Tec net sales were $4.2 million and were in line with sales last year despite the headwinds facing Natur-Tec associated with Chinese tariffs, the Chinese New Year shutdown and the impact the COVID-19 pandemic had on sales in China and South Asia during the quarter. For the near term, we anticipate the COVID-19 crisis will continue to impact Natur-Tec sales because stay-at-home mandates have closed college campuses, stadiums, arenas, corporate office complexes and other large users of compostable plastics. Furthermore, production across the apparel industry has declined sharply as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, decreasing demand for Natur-Tec bioplastic bags, which have become an important part of the sustainability initiatives within this industry. Due to the impact of the stay-at-home mandates in various countries around the world, we expect the apparel packaging business to be soft for at least the next 2 quarters. However, to date, we continue to see strong demand from existing and new customers and, during the quarter, began supplying our proprietary resin compounds to one of the world's largest manufacturers of cutlery within the food service industry. We expect this business to be strong and grow as hygiene considerations from the COVID-19 crisis sustain demand for compostable food service applications.
As you can see, we have built a strong bioplastics business that is supported by our patented technologies as well as compelling industry dynamics and favorable environmental and regulatory priorities. We are extremely excited to be a leader within the industry, and I look forward to providing updates on our success in future calls.
Now I'll turn the call back over to Patrick.
Thank you, Vineet, for the additional insights on Natur-Tec.
To conclude my prepared remarks, we all know that there is significant uncertainty due to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. However, NTIC's long-standing leadership team has successfully navigated a number of prior crises, including the Great Recession of 2008 and 2009. Since then, of course, we have greatly expanded our geographic end market and product diversity. In addition, the size and scale of our business has increased. Finally, the strength of our balance sheet and benefits of our asset-light business model provide us with significant flexibility and resources to help us navigate this time of economic and business uncertainty.
I'd like to use this opportunity to thank all of our global employees and joint venture partners. On behalf of the entire leadership team, thank you for your hard work and dedication throughout this crisis.
With this overview, let me now turn the call over to Matt Wolsfeld to summarize our financial results for the fiscal 2020 second quarter.
Thanks, Patrick. NTIC's net sales decreased less than 1% in fiscal 2020 second quarter as a result of the joint venture operating income, which decreased 17% for the fiscal 2020 second quarter compared to the prior fiscal year.
As alluded to in the first quarter earnings call, total operating expenses increased during the second quarter and totaled $6.5 million compared to $5.4 million for the same period last year. The 19.7% year- over-year increase was primarily due to the timing of higher G&A expenses incurred during the quarter. We continue to proactively control expenses. And year-to-date, total operating expenses increased 6.8%, which is in line with both our budget and expectations. In addition, we expect operating expenses to decline year-over-year in the fiscal 2020 third quarter.
Our fiscal 2020 second quarter income tax expense increased 88.2% to $464,000 as a result of foreign taxes paid on higher level of dividends and distributions we received from our joint ventures during the quarter. We expect the effective rate to reduce greatly in our third and fourth quarters.
NTIC reported net income of $180,000 or $0.02 per diluted share for the fiscal 2020 second quarter compared to $1.4 million or $0.15 per diluted share for the fiscal 2019 second quarter. As of February 29, 2020, working capital was $29.4 million, including $5.6 million in cash and cash equivalents and $6.5 million in available-for-sale securities, compared to $25.5 million, including $5.9 million in cash and cash equivalents and $3.6 million in available-for-sale securities as of August 31, 2019.
As a note, we're currently evaluating the opportunities afforded to us by the CARES Act that was signed into law March 27, 2020. While we -- while the extent of the support is uncertain at this time, the CARES Act includes a sweeping set of financial relief measures in the form of federally guaranteed loans that can be forgiven based on payments made for payroll, utilities, health care benefits and other approved efforts to retain employees. On February 29, 2020, the company had $21.3 million in investments in joint venture, of which 48.7% or $10.4 million is in cash with the remaining balance primarily invested in working capital.
During the fiscal 2020 second quarter, NTIC's Board of Directors declared a cash dividend of $0.165 per share and was payable on February 19, 2020, to shareholders of record on February 5, 2020. As Patrick commented earlier in this call, given current circumstances, we're suspending full fiscal year guidance. With this overview, Patrick, Vineet and I are happy to take your questions.
[Operator Instructions] Our first question comes from the line of Tim Clarkson from Van Clemens Capital.
Just some questions. I know that we're putting a little bit more emphasis on the compostable part of the business. And just some basic questions that are, I think, critical to understanding this. Can you explain the difference between compostable products and biodegradable products?
Tim, this is Vineet. Yes. I'll take that. So biodegradable products are -- is a very general term. There's a lot of spurious products in the market, which use conventional plastics and they'll add additives to it and they'll call them oxo-degradable. Unfortunately, these kind of products are not considered biodegradable, especially in places like the State of California and there are rules, which prohibit the marketing of such mislabeled products. Our products or the products that Natur-Tec sells are certified compostable. And what that means is that in a composting environment, 100% of the product gets converted to -- is consumed by the microorganisms in the disposal environment as a food source and gets converted to CO2, water and biomass. So these are certified compostable by independent third-party labs.
Great. Now what are the characteristics that make Natur-Tec's compostable products superior to the competitions?
We -- the main advantage really is our products are stronger. We formulate them. We have extremely good understanding of the chemistry behind these materials, and we use that understanding to formula products that are stronger, cheaper and easier to process on conventional plastics processing equipment.
Right. Now can you explain how that dynamic played into -- I know you mentioned this significant new opportunity you have for the company that makes cutlery, can you explain how that acted you getting that contract?
So this is a large brand. They sell a lot of cutlery, single-use disposable cutlery in the U.S. market. They have been working with polylactic acid or PLA, which is one of the raw materials for over 5 years and they didn't have any success. They came to us. And we actually had a compound or a resin solution that actually would work in this situation. So we worked closely with one our conversion partners in Asia and developed a solution that met the rigorous performance requirements for this brand. And it's the unique understanding of the chemistry as well as the processing that allowed us to create a solution that met the performance tolerances for this specific brand.
I heard that the competition's products would get clogged in the machines?
Yes. Well, the competition's products, they would get warped or they wouldn't perform as well. They didn't have the heat resistance or the strength required for the application.
Right. Okay. Can you explain this -- the concept of having a close system in a cafeteria or fast food? And how that would work to divert commonly trashed organic waste into a compostable system?
So if you look at municipal solid waste streams pretty much in any city or state, about 50%, 55% of the municipal solid waste stream is what is called organic waste. There's food waste, yard waste, compostable paper. And typically, a lot of these municipalities and states have passed regulations, which prohibit the dumping of this organic waste into landfills. These have to be collected separately and sent to industrial composting facilities. And the reason for that is this organic waste actually in a landfill would generate methane and methane is 25x more dangerous as a greenhouse gas as compared to CO2. So what our compostable products do is they assist in the collection of this organic waste. And if you look at universities or school districts or large office campuses, they have cafeterias on site, and they will use our compostable cutlery. They'll use our compostable bags. They'll collect the food waste as well as the back-of-the-kitchen vegetable peels and other waste, and they'll divert all of that organic waste away from landfills to composting. And so that's what is called zero-waste systems, closed-loop systems, and that's where our compostable products really come in and help enable the implementation of these closed-loop initiatives.
And would that work in fast food places, too?
Yes. It's starting to. A lot of the -- if you look at cities out in the West Coast, they are now saying that fast food or QSR restaurants have to comply with the organic diversion mandates in those cities. So large QSR chains, like McDonald's, are now looking to implement, especially in the -- with eat-in-the-restaurant options, they are looking to implement compostable products.
Sure. One last question, and I'll quit hogging. This is to the, I guess, to Matt and Pat. I mean, is there a consideration ever of spinning off the Natur-Tec division and maybe raising some money separately?
We've talked about that but we don't have any specific plans for that in place at this time.
I mean, just theoretically, if you did do that, what would be potentially some of the advantages of doing that?
Matt, you want to talk about that?
I think the clear advantage would be that Natur-Tec as a stand-alone entity could potentially drive -- it would be -- it would potentially drive not necessarily a different investor set but certainly with the current environment from investing as far as the opportunities with green technologies, I think it would potentially be valued a little differently and probably a little bit higher than the traditional Northern Technologies market that serves more of an -- more industrial applications and oil and gas applications. So as a stand- alone, I think, it would potentially be a very clear, nice environmental investment. But I think ultimately, we're waiting -- we would like to see revenues grow significantly higher than where they are now in order to be able to do that. packaging product like this.
Correct.
Correct.
Our next question comes from the line of [ Kim Chatard ] from [ Merit Investments ].
Just on the expenses, they were a little bit higher in this quarter. Can you maybe help with what the year might look like in absolute dollars for expenses?
Sure. As I take a look at it, one of the things the company is always -- not always, but certainly over the past few years has strived to do is have total operating expense growth in the mid-single digits. So when I look at the year-to-date number, total operating expense has grown by about 6.8%. That's pretty much in line with where we expected to be for the full year. However, given what's going on right now with the COVID-19, no travel, people working from home, I would anticipate that, for the next at least probably 3 or 4 months, we're going to see a dramatic decrease in our operating expenses. So for the full year, I would probably anticipate that going down -- as far as the growth year-over-year going down to the low single digits, maybe 2% or 3% operating growth. So something in the low $20 million number.
Our next question comes from the line of Gus Richard from Northland.
Yes. Just real quick. China announced early this year a ban on single-use plastic. A lot has changed since then. Could you talk a little bit about what you're seeing there? Is there an opportunity for you as they try to move to compostable or eliminate its use?
You're talking about China, right? Yes. So this was announced right before the Chinese New Year shutdown, and then they had the COVID-19 crisis. It's a positive development in our view, but there's still -- we still have to kind of figure out the exact details because the proof is going to be in the pudding to say as in the implementation is going to be very critical. The enforcement of that ban is going to be critical. And so with all this uncertainty, it still remains to be seen how that's going to pan out. But yes, our team in China is looking at that as a potential opportunity for us.
Got it. And then can you talk a little bit about, as the travel restrictions, et cetera, went into place in China, what that trajectory look like? And then now that it's coming out, what that trajectory look like? And then can you compare and contrast that to the U.S. and Europe, what you've seen so far as these regions have shifted to adapt to the reality of COVID-19?
Sure. When looking at China, basically, what we had is we had sales that were really starting to rebound in our -- in the first -- with what we are starting to see coming out of first quarter into the second quarter, we were having some relatively strong months as we talked about during the prepared remarks. China year-over-year, including 3 to 6 months, is basically flat. And given what we saw basically with the entire shutdown of everything in China starting on January 15 pretty much through the end of the quarter, to be flat was a little bit surprising to us because obviously, we had a strong December and strong first half of January to be able to achieve that. So coming out of the shutdown, basically the entire month of March, things are starting to ramp back up. The second half of March was significantly stronger than the first half. And ultimately, March finished -- marked -- our China numbers for March finished where they were operating close to 80% of what the, call it, the pre-January 15 run rate was.
And so with the discussions that we've had with that leadership team and looking at their anticipated product shipments kind of throughout April and then the rest of the quarter and the rest of the year, they expect to back up operating above 100% of what the run rate was pre-pandemic, they expect to be above that run rate basically starting with the end of April and May. So we're seeing a pretty quick rebound in the Chinese market kind of coming out of the shutdown.
As far as how that kind of flowed through the rest of the world, it seems like, at least to us with kind of talking to various partners, that obviously, what's going on in Europe and what's going on in North America is probably about 3 to 5 weeks behind -- 3 to 6 weeks behind where China was during that time period as we've seen things spread. And obviously, if you look at the charts, you can kind of see almost exactly the number of days, everything is behind. I don't know if the United States is going to be as capable as China was in shutting things down and then coming back out of it, similar to Europe. China basically shut down from January 15 until, let's say, the end of February, so basically 45 days. I would guess that it's going to take the Europe and United States, if you're on that same trajectory, would potentially be 2x that. But still, it looks -- if it follows that kind of that same path, we're looking at a couple months of things being very slow, where we anticipate our sales to drop dramatically in kind of April and May. And then hopefully, at that point in time, we can start seeing the sales rebound.
So that's kind of what our -- what we're modeling internally as far as how we're keeping things on hold, how we're working through sales. I do know that because of, I would say -- especially in North America, where we have the most visibility into our customers, I think a lot of our customers had the ability to at least see what was going on in other parts of the world. And so we saw a little bit of a stocking up take place in March. So even though things were starting to slide a little bit in February and people were getting a little bit cautious, there certainly were some opportunities that we had, where people were shutting down plants or stocking up for when they were going to restart business that made March not as -- March was stronger than what we anticipated it would be, even though everybody in NTIC was basically working from home except for the operations team and the shipping team and things like that. So that's really what we're keeping our eye on is how quickly the United States would be able to kind of come out of that -- kind of come out of -- when we'll bottom out and then when will start to rebound from on that.
And just one follow-up. The peak to trough in China versus the peak to trough in U.S. and Europe, was that 100%, 25% or whatever it was in China? What did that look like? Has U.S. and Europe shut off as tightly at this point or not quite so much?
Well, I don't think it certainly hasn't shut off. I mean, in China, what happened is everything was shut down and nothing shipped. I mean, literally, the -- when they did a shutdown, it was -- there was not one order delivered, placed during that 45-day period. Maybe people -- they just did not leave their homes, anybody. And what we're seeing in Europe and what we're seeing in North America is people are still going to work. People are still shipping products. People are still -- it's just everything from an industrial standpoint as far as car production and things like that was still taking place. Now we know that the big 3 auto companies have since put in place a 2- or 3-week shutdown that they're in the middle of. But what we saw in China was dramatically different than any of the responses that we've seen in Europe or in North America.
At this time, I'm showing no further questions. I would like to turn the call back over to Patrick Lynch for closing remarks.
I'd just like to thank everybody for participating today and for your interest in NTIC. Hope you have a great week. Thank you.
Ladies and gentlemen, this concludes today's conference call. Thank you for participating. You may now disconnect.
Greetings, and welcome to the PAVmed Inc. Business Update Conference Call. [Operator Instructions] As a reminder, this conference is being recorded.
I would now like to turn the conference over to Mike Havrilla, Director of Investor Relations for PAVmed. Thank you. Please begin.
Good afternoon, everyone. This is Mike Havrilla, PAVmed's Director of Investor Relations. Thank you all for participating in today's business update conference call. Joining me today on the call are Dr. Lishan Aklog, Chairman and CEO; Dennis McGrath, Chairman -- sorry, President and Chief Financial Officer.
Before we begin, I'd like to caution that comments made during the call by management will contain forward-looking statements regarding the operations and future results of PAVmed. I encourage you to read the company's filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, which identifies specific factors that may cause actual results or events to differ materially from those described in the forward- looking statements. Factors that may affect the company's results include, but are not limited to, the uncertainties inherent in research and development, including the cost and time required to advance products to regulatory submission; whether and when products are cleared by regulatory authorities; market acceptance of products once cleared and commercialized; company's ability to raise additional capital; and the competitive environment.
PAVmed has not yet received clearance from the FDA or other regulatory bodies to market many of its products. New risks and uncertainties may arise from time to time are difficult to predict. All these factors are difficult and impossible to predict accurately, many of them are beyond the company's control. For a further list and description of these and other important risks and uncertainties that may affect future operations, see Part I Item 1A entitled Risk Factors in PAVmed's most recent annual report on Form 10-K filed with the SEC, any subsequent updates filed quarterly reports on Form 10-Q.
Except as required by law, PAVmed disclaims any intention or obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements to reflect changes in expectations or in events, conditions or circumstances on which those expectations may be based or that the likelihood -- actual results would differ from those contained in the forward-looking statements.
As a note, we have just submitted our press release, which should be distributed shortly by our partner and that will be forthcoming.
With that said, I'd like to turn the call over to Lishan Aklog. Dr. Aklog.
Thank you, Mike. Good afternoon, everyone, and thank you for joining us on this quarterly call to update you on our business and discuss our recent financial results. Those of you who have been keeping up with our press releases know that we have been extraordinarily active in the months since our last update, with many exciting accomplishments and even more milestones we look forward to in the upcoming months.
Let me start first with a few words about the enormous challenges we are all facing as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, which, in just a few months, has exacted a tremendous human and economic toll on our industry, on our nation and on our Board. I hope and pray that all of you are weathering the level of storm as best you can and are keeping yourselves and your loved ones safe. I am deeply moved that many of you have taken the time to reach out to us to express your support and continued confidence in us as well as to express your concerns for our safety and health. Thankfully, all members of the PAVmed family, including our employees and critical partners are healthy, safe and able to continue their important work. We are very fortunate that our corporate structure and culture are well suited to address these challenges with minimal short-term and no anticipated long-term disruptions to our strategic plan.
For example, our employees and partners are already dispersed over many states across the nation and are already proficient and productively utilizing modern remote collaboration tools, which they've been doing since our inception. In addition, our team has always embraced a sort of special forces type culture as all members able to operate autonomously when necessary and spontaneously collaborate to address short-term challenges as they arise, while still systematically advancing and executing on our long-term strategic plan.
Before providing you with updates on our product portfolio, I'd like to give you a general summary of how each area of our business has or has not been affected by the pandemic and how we are responding for those that are affected.
First, financial and administrative perspective. As we previously announced, and as Dennis will explain in more detail shortly, we recently completed the November 2019 convertible note financing, which strengthens our balance sheet and enables us to fund our full strategic plan for the foreseeable future as we advance through upcoming milestones. We are also confident that we'll be able to continue to finance our operations as required until we begin to generate meaningful revenue through commercial sales or non-dilutive financing through M&A activities.
Our executive leadership team has implemented a cash management plan focused on preserving cash in areas where activities are inevitably throttled as a result of the lockdown. Our full-time headcount remains lean, our employees and the unique expertise they bring to our efforts are understandably our most critical resource that we do not plan to trim payroll. This makes us eligible for the Paycheck Protection Program within the federal stimulus package. We have already completed the application and, if approved, will result in proceeds of approximately $300,000 structured as a forgivable loan.
On the product development and manufacturing side, we currently utilize over a dozen partners across the U.S. in the design, development, testing and manufacture of our product. All these partners are designated essential services, remaining fully operational with no meaningful disruption in their activities on our behalf. Our supply chain has also remained intact, and we believe it will continue to do so without any disruption. The only 2 components we source outside of the U.S. are 2 electrical parts of our CarpX device we sourced in China. Although we already had sufficient inventory of these parts to get us through initial CarpX commercialization, these manufacturers are already back online following a short COVID-19 disruption earlier this year.
What about on the regulatory front? We, with the help of our regulatory consultants, have multiple active engagements with the U.S. FDA, including for CarpX, PortIO, EsoGuard and EsoCheck. We also have the FDA.
I'm happy to report that none of this work has been materially impacted by COVID-19. Our regulatory consultants are fully operational using remote collaboration tools, the FDA reviewers assigned to our products are also working remotely, and based on ongoing informal communication, appear to have a bandwidth to work on our applications. Some initial concerns that assigned staff would be diverted to COVID-19-related work has not materialized. Most importantly, we have not received any formal or informal indication that we should expect any COVID-19-related delays in the review process.
Two areas where we have had to actively manage COVID-19-related disruptions are our commercial and clinical research activity. On the commercial side, the fundamental challenge that we and essentially all medical device companies are currently facing is that the health care system is obviously overwhelmed by the pandemic. The system has been forced to divert resources and drastically modify operations to care for COVID-19 patients while protecting health care workers. Nonemergency care, including surgical and diagnostic procedures have essentially come to a standstill. Although we can't predict when the engine will start-up again, it is reasonable to assume that non-COVID-19 health care will be among the first things to come back online since one cannot and definitely defer necessary but nonemergency procedures.
I will discuss our EsoGuard commercial activities later, but I am proud to report that Shaun O'Neil, our Chief Commercial Officer, and his team have rapidly adapted to the situation on the ground in pretty remarkable ways. Recruitment of independent sales reps has been unaffected, and their sales training has actually moved virtual without missing a beat. So as sales calls with physicians who are -- which are also being held virtually. Many of the target physicians are, in fact, well positioned to participate in virtual sales call because they are working from home or from their offices using telemedicine and are not necessarily on the front line of the COVID-19.
They mentioned another area that we're managing is our clinical research activity. Life sciences companies face the same challenges with clinical research activities as with commercial activity. Nearly all non- COVID-related clinical research has come to a grinding halt nationwide, including intramural academic research trials and corporate-sponsored trials by large and small companies. We have active or soon to be active clinical trials involving multiple products, including EsoGuard, EsoCheck and PortIO, which are affected by this freeze. I will update these individually a bit later.
Although for the time being, patients cannot be enrolled and procedures cannot be performed, our clinical research team, led by Randy Brown, has done a similarly remarkable job of making sure that we continue to advance the ball where we can so that we are poised to make up for lost time when things eventually open up again. For example, all of these studies, we -- for all of these studies, we continue to work with IRBs on protocol approval and with medical centers on negotiating and executing clinical trial agreement. Some principal investigators continue to actually actively recruit patients so they are ready to officially enroll once we are back online.
Let's go through some of our recent accomplishments and upcoming activities and milestones. Let me start by highlighting some of these. In December, our majority owned subsidiary, Lucid Diagnostics, launched our EsoGuard Esophageal DNA test as the first and only commercially available DNA test to facilitate the detection of Barrett's esophagus with or without dysplasia as well as the esophageal cancer.
In January, we launched 2 multicenter clinical trials to support future regulatory clearance of EsoGuard and EsoCheck as an FDA-registered In-Vitro Diagnostic or IVD. The first patient was enrolled and underwent their procedures in February. Also in January, we held a successful presubmission meeting with the FDA on our PortIO product, focused on the design of a clinical safety study in support of a de novo application.
February brought many additional Lucid accomplishments. We are excited to receive FDA breakthrough device designation for EsoGuard and EsoCheck, which, in addition to validating their potential life-saving impact, provides priority expedited FDA assessment and review and potentially accelerated CMS coverage. We entered into successful -- sorry, we entered into sponsored clinical research agreements with 2 major academic centers: the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle, Washington; and the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia to evaluate EsoCheck in both Barrett's Esophagus progression and eosinophilic esophagitis.
We also announced a new product, our EsoCure Esophageal Ablation Device, a disposable single-use thermal balloon ablation catheter, which is designed to use our patented Caldus Technology to treat this dysplastic Barrett's before it can progress to highly lethal esophageal cancer and to do so without the need for complex and expensive capital equipment.
We also participated in 2 successful meetings with the Medicare contractor, Palmetto GBA, and its molecular diagnostics program, MolDx, one in February, focused on EsoGuard payment and another 2 weeks ago focused on EsoGuard coverage.
In March, the FDA accepted our 510(k) resubmission for CarpX -- for our CarpX minimally invasive carpal tunnel device, incorporating data from our first -- from our successful first-in-human CarpX clinical safety study. Also in March, EsoCheck was honored as a Silver winner of the 2020 Edison award.
This month, we completed training of our first cohort of 24 highly experienced independent gastroenterology sales representatives, covering a large swath of the country, who are now actively engaging with longtime physician partners on EsoGuard and EsoCheck. And just yesterday, despite the pandemic and a massive regulatory backlog in Europe due to systematic changes, we received a firm date in June for the stage 1 audit of our quality system by our EU notified body, which allows us to restart our efforts to pursue EU CE Mark clearance of CarpX and PortIO.
Finally, as always, we continue to expand and advance our extensive intellectual property portfolio, which now includes 129 issued and pending patents, assigned or licensed to PAVmed and its subsidiaries. And we continue to have the success of securing allowances and advancing prosecutions.
We have many key upcoming activities and milestones for us to look forward to in the coming months. Here are a few highlights. We expect to receive a response from the FDA on our CarpX 510(k) resubmission sometime during their 90-day substantive review window, which extends into June. Despite the limitations imposed by COVID-19, we will be accelerating and expanding our commercial activities for EsoGuard, including virtual sales and professional education as well as aggressive marketing, targeting physicians and patients to strengthen brand recognition, generate awareness of underlying conditions and support the sales process. We will continue to aggressively pursue our discussions with Palmetto GBA and other Medicare contractors and hope to secure payment and coverage decisions for EsoGuard's CPT code as soon as possible.
Once the COVID-19 limitations begin to receive, we will restart both our commercial and clinical EsoGuard procedures and enrollment in our 2 IVD clinical trials. We'll also launch 4 additional clinical trials, involving EsoCheck and PortIO, which are currently on hold. We also have several very active M&A and partnership discussions involving NextFlo, EsoGuard, EsoCheck and DisappEAR, which I'll describe in more detail later, but which we hope to consummate in the coming months.
Finally, we still hope to achieve a critical accuracy milestone and benchmark in animal testing of our majority owned subsidiary, Solys Diagnostics, noninvasive laser-based blood glucose diagnostics device.
Now I'd like to now proceed to some more specific updates across our 4 divisions: GI Health, Minimally Invasive Interventions, Infusion Therapy and Emerging Innovations.
Our GI Health division is building a portfolio of complementary products designed to diagnose and treat conditions of the esophagus, including a spectrum of conditions arising from chronic heartburn or gastroesophageal reflux disease leading to esophageal cancer as well as a prevalent inflammatory condition called eosinophilic esophagitis. Two products, EsoGuard and EsoCheck are commercially available. We hope to commercialize another product EsoCare in 2021. In addition, there are other potential pipeline products, which are the subject of active research programs within this division.
Now let's start with EsoGuard and EsoCheck. We continue to make excellent progress on these 2 groundbreaking products less than 2 years after licensing them from our partners at Case Western Reserve University. EsoGuard and EsoCheck are designed to facilitate early detection of conditions leading to esophageal cancer in patients with chronic heartburn. It's important to understand these -- that these conditions lie in a spectrum. So chronic heartburn can lead to benign changes in the surface cells of their lower esophagus of Barrett's esophagus, which can transform into precancerous changes or dysplasia, which in turn can lead to highly lethal esophageal cancer.
These are truly groundbreaking products. The National Cancer Institute highlighted them as one of the year's significant advancements in cancer's prevention in its 2020 reported progress. And as I mentioned, the FDA granted breakthrough device designation, which validates its potential life-saving impact. And EsoCheck, as I mentioned, was also recently recognized as a game-changing innovation and among the best new medical device products of the year by the Edison Awards honoring Thomas Edison.
So briefly, how do they work? EsoCheck is an FDA-cleared cell collection device, which can perform targeted and protected sampling of cells from the lining of the lower esophagus as part of a 5-minute noninvasive office-based procedure. It serves as an alternative to an invasive upper endoscopy performed under anesthesia in a hospital or dedicated endoscopy center. EsoGuard is a highly accurate next- generation sequencing diagnostic assay, which detects methylation changes of 31 sites on 2 genes, which occur in patients along with Barrett's Esophagus to esophageal cancer spectrum. EsoGuard has performed on samples collected with EsoCheck and is commercially available in the United States as a Laboratory Developed Test or LDT.
Although professional society practice guidelines recommend screening in over 10 million high-risk GERD patients to detect and treat Barrett's before it progresses to cancer, fewer than 10% actually undergo screening using invasive upper endoscopy. The tragedy of these conditions is that the vast majority of patients diagnosed with esophageal cancer are not aware that they have underlying Barrett's and that the progression of cancer could have been prevented through careful monitoring and treatment if the Barrett's had been diagnosed earlier. Sadly, over 80% of these esophageal cancer patients will die within 5 years of diagnosis.
Based on very modest penetration of U.S. GERD patients currently recommended for Barrett's screening according to published guidelines and on a Deloitte market assessment we commissioned, we believe that the estimated addressable domestic market opportunity for these products is several billion dollars.
The most important update for these products is on the commercial front. We are commercializing EsoGuard using a hybrid model with internal sales management, marketing and professional education, working closely with independent sales representatives across the country. And in addition to Shaun O'Neil, our Chief Commercial Officer, we have hired 2 outstanding regional sales managers covering the Eastern and Western U.S. and a fantastic Director of Marketing and Communications. As I previously mentioned, last week, we completed training of the first cohort, these 20 highly experienced sales reps cover most of the country. They are all senior professionals, averaging at least a dozen years in the field, calling on physicians on behalf of well-established leading companies in the space. Most bring deep long- standing relationships with gastroenterologists in their territories. They currently had access to their physicians through virtual sales calls despite the lockdown, and we are confident they'll be first in line once things open up.
Several accounts that completed training had product on the shelf have performed procedures on patients before the shutdown of nonemergency procedures. Since then, our sales teams have been in discussions with well over 100 accounts who will be in an excellent position to begin performing procedures once things open up.
As I mentioned earlier, we have initiated an aggressive marketing campaign of the professional journals and social media, targeting physicians and patients to strengthen EsoGuard and EsoCheck brand recognition. Engagement with these activities has been excellent, and the feedback has been very positive. We're also making solid progress on the reimbursement and coverage front. As we've previously mentioned, EsoGuard received a CPT code last year. We successfully advanced it through CMS process. We were granted gap-fill designation, which permits us to proceed with payment and coverage, discussions with designated Medicare contractors and private payers. As I mentioned, we had 2 successful meetings with Palmetto GBA and MolDx. We're working with our consultants to finalize a detailed dossier in support outcome.
There are many additional exciting developments and future activities in this division. As I mentioned, we're excited about the progress we're making on a EsoCure Ablation Device. This, as I mentioned, is the disposable single-use thermal balloon ablation catheter, designed to advance through the working channel of a standard endoscope and uses our patented Caldus Technology to ablate the esophageal tissue. Once cleared and commercialized, EsoCure will allow physicians to treat dysplastic Barrett's before it could progress to cancer and do so without the need for complex and expensive capital equipment like current technologies from Medtronic and others do.
We expect to complete development and FDA 510(k) submission to be secured by early 2021 and hope to have it commercialized later that year. As previously noted, we've launched these 2 international multicenter clinical trials, ESOGUARD-BE-1 and BE-2 to support future PMA submission for FDA registration of EsoGuard and EsoCheck as IVDs. One of the studies is a screening study of high-risk GERD patients, and the other is a case-control study of patients with known Barrett's or a more advanced condition. We have over 60 sites in the U.S. and Europe. Clinical trial enrollment has paused after the first patient was enrolled and underwent procedures last month. We have a couple of patients scheduled for later this month, but do not expect to be in full swing until clinical activities resume in the coming weeks and months across the country and in Europe.
Meanwhile, our clinical research team is continuing to secure IRB approvals and complete contracts so we can make up for lost times when things open up. As I mentioned, we have 2 other additional EsoCheck clinical trials on hold with Fred Hutch one and the one with the University of Pennsylvania, and they are both -- we look forward to advancing those as things open up.
Finally, we have 2 active partnership discussions involving GI Health products. We have a strong interest from an established diagnostic company outside the U.S. to perform and market EsoGuard in that region. We also have been offered the opportunity to license highly accurate eosinophilic esophagitis biomarkers from a major academic medical center for commercialization as an LDT. I expect this license agreement to be consummated soon.
Let's move on to Minimally Invasive Interventions and our CarpX product. CarpX is our patented single- use disposable minimally invasive device, designed to treat carpal tunnel syndrome while reducing recovery times. The balloon catheter device is inserted under the scarred ligament, tensioning it while pushing the nerve and tendons away. When activated, bipolar radiofrequency electrodes precisely cut a ligament from the inside out in a matter of seconds. We believe CarpX will dramatically reduce recovery times compared to traditional open surgery, targeting an estimated $1 billion immediately addressable domestic market opportunity.
We are seeking FDA 510(k) clearance to commercially market CarpX for minimally invasive carpal tunnel release. The FDA recommended a clinical safety study to support 510(k) resubmission, and we consulted closely with them during the development of the study protocol. As we've previously announced, the clinical safety study was successfully completed and incorporated into a 510(k) submission, which is currently under FDA review.
Briefly, 20 carpal tunnel syndrome patients in New Zealand underwent successful CarpX, minimally invasive carpal tunnel release. All patients met the study's prespecified effectiveness endpoint, which was clinical device technical success, defined as the endoscopic confirmation of complete division of the transverse carpal ligament. CarpX consistently cut the ligament clearly and precisely without evidence of thermal spread beyond the targeted tissue cutline. Procedure times fell after a short learning curve, indicating that the procedure can be performed in the same or less time as traditional open surgery.
Two weeks and 90-day postoperative follow-up rates were 100% and 95%, respectively, exceeding the targeted 80% rate recommended by the FDA. The only loss to follow-up was a patient who was documented to be back to normal with resolution symptoms at 6 weeks. He opted not to return to the study site for his 90-day follow-up visit because he was traveling a significant distance away and was overall satisfied with the procedure's outcome.
All patients who completed follow-up met the study's prespecified primary safety endpoint, which was defined as device safety with no serious device-related adverse events. Patients underwent additional prespecified outcome assessments at baseline and during postoperative follow-on visit. These assessments use well-established, standardized and validated measures to assess patient satisfaction as well as changes in symptoms, motor and sensory function and neurophysiologic parameters following the procedure. The excellent results of these prespecified outcome assessments following CarpX were similar to or better-than-expected results from traditional open surgery.
Since the FDA accepted our 510(k) resubmission application, we've received some informal communications with them and look forward to their formal response this quarter during the 90-day substantive review window, which extends to June.
Now next, some brief highlights from our Infusion Therapy division, which includes PortIO and NextFlo. PortIO is our implantable intraosseus vascular access device, which allows direct access to the bone marrow to deliver medications, fluids and other substances. We are seeking an initial short-term implant duration indication through the FDA's de novo pathway. In January, we participated in a successful presubmission meeting with the FDA focused on the clinical protocol for a single -- for a small single- center clinical safety study in New Zealand and on the target population in our proposed label.
The short-term clinical safety study as well as a long-term study we had planned to perform in Colombia, South America are both on hold due to travel and clinical limitations. We're continuing with the necessary administrative work, so we can proceed immediately to training and enrollment once these -- once things open up. And we're also exploring whether it might be advantageous to move the clinical safety study to the U.S. as an IDE study.
Our NextFlo infusion system, just a brief comment about that. This system delivers highly accurate gravity-driven infusions independent of the height of the IV bag and seeks to eliminate the need for complex and expensive electronic infusion pumps for most of the estimated million infusions delivered in the United States each day. We are successfully advancing the NextFlo infusion test through design control development and testing with the goal of a 510(k) submission later this year.
An exciting development that arose from M&A discussions with key strategics in the space has been an expansion of the applications using NextFlo as a platform technology. These are applications that we had always contemplated and are now pursuing at the request of these strategics. These applications include disposable infusion pumps for home use, packaged drug infusions, military and pharma applications and intravenous nutrition. Our M&A discussions remain active with several large companies in the space, and we look forward to consummating a deal as soon as possible.
I wish I had more time to update you on exciting projects we're working on in our Emerging Innovations division, again, a few brief highlights. Our DisappEAR resorbable pediatric tubes, which are manufactured from aqueous silk and seek to revolutionize the care of the estimated 1 million children who undergo bilateral ear tube placement each year. We are very close to securing a commercial development and manufacturing relationship with a large multinational company, which has developed expertise and processing scope for commercial use. Their technique allows the ear tubes to be injection molded instead of machined, which greatly enhances the commercial potential of this product. And then as I briefly mentioned, our -- in our subsidiary, Solys Diagnostics, the research and development plan for our noninvasive laser-based blood glucose monitoring technology is progressing very well, and we expect to complete bench top and animal testing in the coming weeks.
Our Emerging Innovations team is also working on several exciting products, including products in the ECMO cardiopulmonary support and ventilation areas. Both of these areas are highly relevant to the treatment of COVID-19 patients and other respiratory conditions.
I'll now pass the mic on to Dennis for a review of our financial results.
Thanks, Lishan, and good afternoon, everyone. I'll be brief as our financial results for the quarter and year ended December 31, 2019, were reported in our press release that was published just prior to the beginning of this call.
Our annual report on Form 10-K will be available at sec.gov and our website early next week. The complexities involved with accounting for the noncash charges related to our fourth quarter convertible debt financing, coupled with lawyers, auditors, consultants and staff working remotely, made the extension unavoidable. You'll recall that even as late as just last week, we completed the second half of the November 2019 financing, which Lishan spoke to, which also impacted the related registration statement that was filed in December and amended on March 30. The elongated registration process was impacted in part by the SEC's availability challenges as they were working at home as well. Nonetheless, the financial results I will be providing today are consistent with the preliminary results reported on March 30 as available to you and reported on Form 12b-25 extension filed at that time.
So with regards to the financial results, research and development expenses for the fourth quarter of 2019 were $2.3 million, up from about $1.4 million for the same period in 2018 and about $700,000 higher sequentially. The year-over-year increase reflects incremental hiring of Chief Medical Officer, Chief
Operating Officer and Engineer PAVmed as well as clinical trial-related expenses, many of which Lishan just went through for CarpX and particularly EsoGuard is the early setup cost for the IVD clinical trial began in earnest in the fourth quarter.
General and administrative expenses were $2.3 million for the fourth quarter of 2019, compared with $1.9 million for the same period in 2018 and were higher by about $600,000 sequentially. The sequential increase reflects the financing transaction costs in the fourth quarter related to the November convertible debt financing. The year-over-year increase reflects an increase in compensation-related costs, particularly stock-based compensation, increased IP legal costs and an increase in Investor Relations activity.
PAVmed reported a net loss attributable to common stockholders of $6.3 million or a loss of $0.19 per common share. However, our press release provides substantially more detail related to the noncash charges occurring in the current and prior periods. Also, the press release provides a table entitled Non- GAAP Measures, which highlights these amounts along with interest expense and other noncash charges like depreciation, stock-based compensation, financing-related costs, should enable you to have a better understanding of the company's financial performance. You'll notice from the table that after adjusting the GAAP loss by these charges, the company reported a non-GAAP adjusted loss for the 3 months ended December 31 of $3.9 million or about $0.12 per common share.
PAVmed had cash of $6.2 million as of December 31, 2019. Subsequent to the year-end and just last week, the company received net proceeds of approximately $6 million from the prepayment of the investor notes received in the November private placement transaction with 2 institutional investors. You will recall, the company entered into a Series B senior secured convertible note with each of the Series A investors that gave us this option for an additional $6 million. That funding, last week, was in connection with these previously announced Series B investor notes.
Our cash balance at March 31 is approximately $8.5 million, and we're very confident that we will continue to have access to additional funding to finance our ongoing operations as needed, which Lishan has alluded to earlier in the prepared remarks.
Furthermore, as of January 2020, we accumulatively paid down approximately $7.7 million of the previous December 2018 senior convertible debt, which had an initial balance of just under $8 million at the outset and leaves a remaining balance of $50,000. So with that, operator, we could open it up to additional questions from our audience.
[Operator Instructions] Our first question comes from the line of Anthony Vendetti of the Maxim Group.
Dennis, Lishan, thanks so much for doing the call and also for going over the COVID-19 impact across all facets of your business. Seems like most of -- well, all of your business is continuing to operate. And you've been operating, and they have had experience operating remotely. So that side of the business seems fine. It's the commercial side that and the delay some of the trials and so forth, but that's to be expected. I was wondering if you could just talk a little bit more about CarpX. Obviously, this is a resubmission. So you've had a lot of conversations -- many conversations with the FDA over this time period. Do you -- I mean, if it wasn't for the COVID-19 situation, do you believe they would have needed the full 90 days? And with the current situation, is it hard to gauge whether you think they will take the full 90 days to review? Or what -- based on your conversations with them, where are they at in terms of the review process?
Sure. That's a great question. And obviously, we have to be careful about predicting anything, but I can make -- I can provide some insights that you alluded to. One of them is that we've been involved with the FDA on this product. This is a resubmission, as you noted. And what I did mention was that we have the same lead examiner, who was very supportive of our application at the beginning. So that was -- we were fortunate to have that, that's not guaranteed, as you may know.
So yes, for the same people who work with us on developing the preclinical testing and documenting the lack of thermal spread and the thermal safety, the preclinical setting in animals and cadavers, the same people who worked with us to develop the protocol for the clinical study are now reviewing this.
As I mentioned, we don't really have any sense that they're being affected by the epidemic -- by the pandemic there. They acknowledge receipt. They've -- they quickly proceeded with the acceptance checklist. I've mentioned, we've had some informal communications that indicate that they're deep into the weeds of the application.
So we've had no indication that there is a slowdown. And we've always been hopeful that because -- and now because it's the same group, that because this is a resubmission, that there would be an opportunity for things to move quickly. But there's no way we can really predict that. I mean this is the counterargument to that is that we are submitting a clinical trial, even though it's small and there's 20 patients. It's a substantial amount of data and information that they have to go through. So I wouldn't want to presume that things will move more quickly than normal. But I can say that I don't think we're slowed down by COVID. We're very fortunate that we have the same group reviewing it. And we've had some informal communications that indicates that they are well into their -- so they're deep into their review of the application.
No, that's very helpful, Lishan. And if you could just give a little bit more color on EsoGuard in terms of feedback from KOLs during your initial commercial launch here. How is that going...
Yes. Sure. I mean, it's been -- I mean, I'm just going to sound cheerleader-ish a little bit, but it's not absolutely remarkable. I mean, the feedback has been excellent. We have really solid people on the ground. Our Eastern sales manager is a long-time veteran of the GI space. And the people who are -- the independent reps who are already on the phone and on e-mail contacted to doctors are having these conversations, and these conversations are going very well. I mean, we have them well trained with objection handling to handle all the various tasks that these conversations can take about how it relates to their existing endoscopy business and so forth. And the feedback we're getting, and I receive a lot of these is that people ultimately get it. They understand that there's an opportunity here to enlarge the funnel and to bring more patients that are not in this group of sort of 90% of the patients should be getting screened who were not getting screened as a way to expand the funnel and to ultimately both benefit patients and benefit their practice.
The practice -- some of the larger practices already have a subset of their physicians who run esophageal clinic, they run motility and VH clinic. And any concern we had about sort of where this would fit in within their practices, it's probably not material. The feedback has been, yes, let's get started and let's get rolling and get these patients into these clinics. So I really can honestly say the feedback has been extremely positive. And once we -- once they're actually able to do procedures, we expect -- we have to be pretty quick and substantial.
Yes. It's great. And so just obviously, the commercial launch is going to be stalled by COVID-19, do you think there'll be some pent-up demand as you're having these conversations?
Yes. No, definitely. Yes. It started to wrap. But yes, exactly. That's the point I was trying to get across, which is that there is still a lot of activity. And because of the existing relationships of these reps, they are able to pick up the phone and talk to their long-time physician colleagues about this technology and begin that process. So all of that activity has really been -- it's somewhat affected, but it's been proceeding pretty aggressively. The only thing we can't do are actually procedure, right? And so I think the way you describe it is exactly right, but there will be pent-up demand and that will make up somewhere for lost time because of the activities that are currently ongoing.
[Operator Instructions] Our next question comes from [ Asif Ahmed ].
Just I want a quick follow-up on Lucid and since you guys have all the stuff lined up. Would there be any chance -- you don't have to go into details if there something is confidential, obviously, but any chance that you guys are spinning off running Lucid as a separate entity? I mean, has there been any plans or anything? We just want to -- obviously, many of the guys that I'm working with, they would like to know and are really interested in if there's anything you can say that, that is obviously safe and secure to say.
That's a great question, and it's one that is a frequent inquiry made of us. And so I'm not going to answer your question very specifically because it is a strategic plan that the Board will mull over continuously. I'm going to give you a more broad answer. Our plans this year include a bunch of activities that Lishan thoroughly went through that we'll modulate our burn rate from where it is now and where are the clinical trials once they ramp up. And there are many access points for us to finance that business. We can finance as we have at the parent level. We can finance with debt. We've been creative with that.
Fortunately, we'd evolve to a level of sophistication that the early days of PAVmed's immaturity had different types of financing structures. One, as you suggest, is a financing inside the subsidiary in whatever form that takes private or public financing. It's a tool, a proceeds from an M&A transaction on one of our assets and revenues for the second half.
So your question, although I can't specifically answer because no firm decision has been made about that, the ability to finance inside a subsidiary and treat that as its own separate entity. Right now, we look at this as a single segment with 4 divisions. But what you're suggesting is something that could be available to us in the future. And as it continues to evolve, we'll be opportunistic that -- and take action in best interest of shareholders.
Our next question's come from the line of [ Robert Wileman ].
It's in regards to -- I believe there's a provision in the latest round of convertible notes that speaks about the requirement of a sale of an asset by the end of June to provide a source of nondilutive financing. Is that something that we expect to still come to fruition? Is that a provision that is -- that could be sort of renegotiated if an acceptable terms for sale of an asset don't present themselves? Just could you provide as much context as you can around that?
Yes, sure thing. Let me expand your comment just a bit to add context. When we completed the -- engaged in the November financing, you'll recall there were 2 pieces of that puzzle. The Series A financing are notes that we got -- received $7 million. And the Series B, that was an additional $7 million of debt, $6.3 million of net proceeds. Available option to us that had prerequisite conditions to be achieved, one of them is what you just outlined that a nondilutive financing at a certain level would occur before a certain date. And that condition was waived as indicated by the financing last week. I mean, investors are so delighted with the progress of the company, the continued involvement of our value, but we waive that condition.
Now that's not an indication that we have lost sight of that. As Lishan indicated in his remarks, we are actively engaged in M&A-related activities, including our NextFlo with multiple parties. So although we're not prepared to speak specifically to that at this point, rest assured, there are ongoing discussions related to that. So hopefully, that answered your question.
It does. That was helpful. And in terms of NextFlo, is -- we're talking with multiple parties, and I would imagine, gauging their interest. In the background, are we also progressing towards the FDA clearance for that device where presumably the value of that would go up substantially?
Yes. Sorry, I wasn't clear about that. I did try to mention that in my comments. So the answer is yes. The way -- the best way to understand that is to think of NextFlo as a platform technology, as I mentioned, with multiple applications. So the application that we had always focused on and the one that was the center of most of our commentary was this infusion set to replace electronic infusion pumps. And that product is, in fact, as you asked, advancing through our design control development process, and we're looking to have submission to the FDA before the end of the year. So that is moving along, and we are definitely keeping the parties that we're talking to informed about that.
What's interesting is that they would come back to us and express interest in these other applications beyond the infusion set new patient refusing to that. And it's because of their inquiries around this that we have started to pursue these other applications, which is disposable infusion pumps and particularly that and the prefilled drug infusions. And that's actually enhanced our ability to have these conversations. So the way this ultimately could evolve would be that we enter into agreements that start with 1 particular application with milestones or time lines that extend for other applications. And even in theory, have multiple transactions with different parties where we're licensing or they're acquiring the technology for certain applications. Does that make sense?
But yes, the simple answer is we absolutely are moving the products along both because we would like to eventually commercialize them, but also, as you said, because that does, in fact, enhance the value.
[Operator Instructions] Our next question comes from the John Levin of Levin Capital.
Lishan, Dennis, congratulations on all you're doing, it's really terrific. The presentation was wonderful. EsoGuard and EsoCheck -- I'm outside, so it's hard to hear me, forgive me.
We can hear you fine.
We can hear you fine, sorry.
Why are you not able to sell any -- what?
But I guess that didn't happen, right?
Why are you not able to -- okay. Why are you not able to sell any of it yet? I understand COVID is an impediment, but is there some technical reason that you're in pre-K? You may have said and I missed it. What is the impediment to getting [indiscernible] sales?
Yes. The impediment is simply that there are no procedures being performed. So for us to effectively sell EsoGuard and EsoCheck, the physician has to perform a procedure, get a sample, send the sample to procedures being performed, there's no sort of stocking inventory right now. It's just we have to wait for procedures to come up. So we are building up demand. There's no doubt about that. And once we're -- things open up, so we'll be able to sell it.
Yes. Perfect. I understand. I would have assumed for their most vulnerable or their most favorite patients, they would have said, "oh, sneak into our office, and we'll get one done to you."
Yes, there really is none of that right now. I mean, we've actually had some creative conversations about moving them with equipment as cars passed by and so forth. But for all classical purposes, it has to wait till that comeback. But don't come back sooner than you might think because you can't wait forever.
I understand. I was just trying to make sure there was no regulatory or procedural or some kind of...
No, no, no. Not at all. We were off to the races, and then things came to a hold. Yes.
Well, let me follow that up, if I may. When you're offer the races, in patients -- what percentage of the -- how many -- when you were at the races, how many horses ran? And what was the result with the horses that ran?
Yes. We were just getting started. So we only had a handful of patients at 2 sites, before we -- before things shut down. But those cases went fine. Those physicians and their staff were trained. They were able to perform the procedure. The samples were sent. So everything was successful in that regard. But it was only a handful before the elective procedure started to end. But as I mentioned, we have 100 -- over -- we are in contact with well over 100, maybe close to 200 accounts right now as we speak. So those conversations were -- they're priming and gearing up to go once things open up.
We have reached the end of the question-and-answer session. I will now turn the call back over to management for any closing remarks.
Thank you all for joining this afternoon and for your questions. We look forward to keeping you apprised of our progress via our news releases and periodic conference calls such as this one, encourage you to continue to stay in contact, which many of you have with Mike directly with any questions at jmh@pavmed.com. Thank you for joining us today. You have a great day, and stay safe.
That concludes today's conference. You may disconnect your lines at this time. Thank you for your participation, and have a great evening.
Greetings, and welcome to the PaySign 2019 Year-End Earnings Call. [Operator Instructions] As a reminder, this conference is being recorded.
This presentation may include forward-looking statements to the extent that the information presented in this presentation discusses financial projections, information or expectations about the company's business plans, results of operations, the impact of COVID-19, returns on equity, expected gross margins, markets or otherwise make statements about future events, such statements are forward looking. Such forward-looking statements can be identified by the use of words such as should, may, intends, anticipates, believes, estimates, projects, forecasts, expects, plans and proposes. Although the company believes that the expectations reflected in these forward-looking statements are based on reasonable assumptions, there are a number of risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those such forward-looking statements. You are urged to carefully review and consider any cautionary statements and other disclosures, including the statements made under the heading Risk Factors and elsewhere in our 2019 Form 10-K. Forward-looking statements speak only as of the date of the document in which they are contained, and the company does not undertake any duty to update any forward-looking statements, except as may be required by law.
This presentation also includes adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP financial measure that is not prepared in accordance with nor an alternative to financial measures prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, GAAP. In addition, adjusted EBITDA is not based on any standardized methodology prescribed by GAAP and is not necessarily comparable to similarly titled measures presented by other companies.
I would now like to turn the conference over to our host, Chief Executive Officer, Mark Newcomer. Please go ahead.
Thank you, Diego. Good afternoon, everyone, and thank you for joining us for a discussion about our full year 2019 financial results. I'm Mark Newcomer, the President and Chief Executive Officer of PaySign. With me this afternoon is Mark Attinger, our Chief Financial Officer.
Before I begin my commentary on the business, I would like to address the delay in the filing of our 10- K. The delay in our filing was due to several rounds of auditor request for additional data, which took numbers we reported on March 16. Mark can touch on this in more detail during his discussion.
I'm very pleased to be able to deliver strong results for the full-year performance, even with the miss related to our revenue guidance. For the full year, our revenues were a record $34.7 million, an increase of 48% compared to the prior year. Our full-year net income was up 188% or $7.5 million, also a record, and our adjusted EBITDA was 10.1%, an increase of 106%. I'm very happy with these results and extremely proud of our team and their contributions towards our continued growth.
We experienced strong growth in our existing industry verticals and as we expanded into new verticals. In 2019, we built out a new business line, added 49 new card programs, including 38 in plasma, 7 in pharma and 4 other card programs. And we now have in excess of 2.9 million cardholders on our platform.
I'm especially pleased with the revenue growth in our pharmaceutical programs, which increased from $366,000 to over $7.3 million in just 1 year. With new opportunities opening in the space, we have expanded beyond our long-standing pharmaceutical payment offerings and established the Patient Affordability business line to include other services required by our hub service clients. These new services include pharmacy based co-pay, medical claims processing and payments, centralized billing and payment services as well as other products. You'll be hearing the term hub from us quite often moving forward, as we grow this business line. So to define hubs, hub service providers are companies that pharmaceutical manufacturers use to maintain a connection with the patients during all phases of the prescription delivery process.
Over the past few years, there has been a consolidation of hub service providers. The consolidation in the industry has turned allied companies into competitors, therefore, created an opportunity for us to provide these new offerings to hub service providers that lack or choose not to provide these services in-house. In response to this opportunity, we have made the decision to increase our capabilities to cater to these hub service providers with programs currently onboarded and performing to initial expectations. Over the course of the past year, we have continued to build out this business line and have onboarded new personnel to meet the needs of this unique market. This represented a substantial investment into new software development, architecture and human capital. Drawing from industry experience, we designed, developed and deployed a best-in-class solution to meet the needs of our patient affordability partners. These enhanced capabilities will further our reach into the patient affordability space and allow us to onboard new clients for multiple sectors.
We have continued to build out and strengthen our entire team here at PaySign. In the latter part of 2019, we also increased the bench strength of our executive team with the addition of Matt Lanford as our Chief Product Officer and Kim Sergent as our Chief Marketing Officer. They have been instrumental in creating new products, features and functionality for our clients as well as refreshing our brand. I'm very pleased to have them as part of our team.
I'd like to touch for a moment now on COVID-19 and would like to reiterate that our highest priority remains the safety of our employees, cardholders and customers. We have taken immediate actions to protect our people, customers and business by executing on our business continuity plans. To us, especially important is the main sectors we serve are crucial to the health and well-being of the general public. We have implemented measures to manage potential disruptions in meantime, real-time communications across entire organizations with our clients and cardholders. To date, there have been no work stoppages and no employees testing positive for COVID-19. Of course, we will continue to monitor this situation very closely.
The impact of COVID-19 to our business so far has been minimal, with no apparent effect on our pharma and Patient Affordability business lines, which continue to see excellent growth, and only a slight impact to our plasma business. However, we are expecting at this time to see a continued growth year-over- year in the plasma business. On March 19, 2020, the U.S. Department of Homeland Security released the guidance document that enumerated source plasma donation and pharmaceutical supply as part of the critical infrastructure. Plasma donation centers have been classified as being within the category of essential, critical infrastructure, health care and pharmaceutical supply that is exempted from general lockdown or closure directives.
Looking forward to the other side of the pandemic, 2 things. First is that we expect the economic fallout from the pandemic will lead to an increase in the number of donors as donor compensation can bring an extra $500 a month to frequent donors. And secondly, if plasma collected from people with the COVID-19 antibody is found to be a component of any therapies that would treat the virus, we would expect to see a sizable increase in the number of plasma donations, both from the current donor demographic and the general public.
Looking ahead, we will continue to broaden and diversify our market focus for our card programs, and we'll seek to introduce new products. We are developing new business-to-business solutions, enhancing our customer web and mobile applications and building new pharma patient affordability offerings. We expect continued growth in pharma and plasma and to continue to expand it to new markets.
With regards to PaySign Premier, we continued to refine the product that is offered through one of our plasma clients. To date, we have minimized our marketing expense for the Premier Card as we have chosen to deploy the majority of our focus and resources on the expansion of the previously mentioned initiatives.
Lastly, we will continue to evaluate acquisition opportunities in 2020. We have evaluated several candidates to date. However, there is nothing definitive to share at this time.
Before I turn it over, I'd like to address the question of Dan Henry. As you all know, Mr. Henry has served as our Chairman and as an Independent Director since 2018. On March 25, it was announced that Mr. Henry was appointed Chief Executive Officer, President and as a Board Member at Green Dot Corporation. After a discussion with the PaySign Board and Mr. Henry, it was unanimously decided, there would be no change to Mr. Henry's status with the company. Mr. Henry remains with PaySign as our Chairman and as an Independent Director.
At this time, I'd like to turn it over to our CFO, Mark Attinger, who will take us through the numbers in more detail, and will touch briefly on SOX 404(b).
Thank you, Mark. So I'm going to take us through the full year results, provide some variance commentary, touch on SOX 404(b) and give you some insights into quarter 1 performance. And digesting our earnings and the 10-K, I'm sure you've noticed we've disaggregated revenue a bit and enhanced our commentary. As I proceed, references to year-on-year improvements or percentage changes, unless stated otherwise, refers to the full year 2019 as compared to 2018.
Revenue for the year ending December 31, 2019, was $34,666,653, an increase of 48.0% compared to the $23,423,675 the prior year. Revenue consisted of $27.0 million or 78% in support of the plasma industry, $7.4 million or 21% pharma and $0.3 million or 1% in other revenue. Although quarter 4 dollars loaded to card performed as expected, the revenue conversion rate on plasma of 3.42% was down from 3.80% in Q3. This unexpected degradation, combined with lighter pharma spend, contributed to the full year revenue shortfall versus guidance.
Gross profit increased 68.8% to $19.3 million or 55.5% of revenues compared to $11.4 million and 48.7% of revenues in 2018. This 685 basis point improvement was driven primarily to favorable mix towards higher-margin card programs. The operating expenses were $13.1 million, an increase of 47.2% versus $8.9 million in 2018. The increase consisted primarily of $2.5 million in salaries and benefits, $1.1 million in stock-based compensation and a $0.4 million increase in depreciation and amortization.
Benefiting from higher card balances, interest income was $441,000 compared to $140,000 the prior year. Net income for the year was $7,454,319 or $0.16 per basic share, an increase of 188.0% compared to $2,588,054 or $0.06 per basic share the prior year. Fully diluted was $0.14 per share compared to $0.05. Non-GAAP adjusted EBITDA was $10,114,980 or $0.21 per basic share, an increase of 106.2% compared to $4,904,781 or $0.11 per share at the prior year. Furthermore, the adjusted EBITDA margin improved to 29.2%, up 824 basis points from 20.9% in 2018.
We loaded $859 million loaded to the card versus $621 million the prior year, and our revenue conversion rate of gross dollar volume loaded on cards was 4.04% or 404 basis points compared to 3.77% or 377 basis points the prior year. I'd also like to point out that our near final 2020 first quarter pharma net dollars loaded to card increased approximately 70% versus quarter 1 2019 and increased 275% versus the prior quarter loads. This illustrates both the seasonal nature of pharma business and the significant year-on-year growth.
From a balance sheet perspective, consolidated cash, including restricted cash, has increased 43.9% or $13.9 million to $45.6 million compared to $31.7 million at year-end 2018. As a point of reference and a seasonal peak for our current programs, consolidated cash at February month end was $61.6 million. Also, although we haven't completed our reconciliation, we expect our quarter-ending consolidated cash to be approximately $54 million to $55 million, including unrestricted cash of approximately $9.5 million, consistent with year-end.
Working capital increased to $13.6 million compared to $5.9 million at December 31, 2018. The $7.7 million improvement was due primarily to increased consolidated cash, partially offset by an increase in the card funding liability. Our liquidity, as measured by an adjusted current ratio, excluding restricted cash and cardholder funds from both sides of the balance sheet, respectively, reflected 7.9x coverage at year- end 2019, up from 5.4x at 2018.
I'd like to speak for a moment regarding Sarbanes-Oxley 404(b). At the end of quarter 2, our market cap resulted in being classified as an accelerated filer and subject to an independent audit of our internal controls of our financial reporting, i.e., the 404(b). The objective of Sarbanes-Oxley and the COSO framework is to make sure that your processes and controls help to prevent any inaccuracies in your financial reporting. So in preparation, we brought in a third-party advisory firm, as many companies do, to aid us in preparing for 404(b). Subsequently, PaySign and our auditors identified material weakness over internal controls for financial reporting. We take this very seriously and have taken immediate steps to remediate the identified weakness. We added staff to aid in the assessments. We implemented an appropriate separation of responsibilities. We improved our documentation and have strengthened the processes with respect to systems user access and change control. We will continue to make improvements during 2020. Please refer to Item 9A of the 10-K for more information.
In the light of the identified control weaknesses, the auditors were extra diligent in their assessment of the financial audit, leading to an extended duration. This resulted in the completion of our third year with our current auditors. And once again, the audit opinion stated, "The financial statements present fairly in all material respects the financial position of the company as of December 31, 2019". And the opinion further states, "Results of operation's cash flows were in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles". Also, for those of you interested in looking more closely at quarter 4, our financial results, of course, do roll; therefore, full year less September year-to-date, does reflect our Q4 earnings and financial activity.
As we look to 2020, we will refrain from issuing revenue guidance at this time to allow for a further evaluation of COVID-19 and any impact on our business. Pharma and plasma are both defensive in nature, as our CEO has stated, plasma has been deemed critical infrastructure. We do expect to benefit from continued revenue growth and also similar gross margins to 2019. We also expect to experience moderate OpEx growth as we continue to make select and sound investments in our sales, technologies and operations capabilities. Although we have not completed our month-end and quarter-end closing procedures, for the first quarter, we do anticipate revenue of approximately $10.4 million to $10.5 million, up 43% to 45% versus $7.3 million the prior year. I think that concludes my remarks at this time. I'm going to turn it back over to our moderator to begin a question-and-answer session. Thank you.
[Operator Instructions]
Our first question comes from Peter Heckmann with Davidson.
What -- in terms of the revenue conversion rate issue you talked about that popped up in the fourth quarter, can you give us a little bit more background on that? And anything that may have changed in terms of mix and how that -- what that implies for the next couple of quarters?
Yes. Pete, thank you for the question. So that revenue conversion rate that I quoted was specifically plasma. And we saw a significantly lower revenue conversion rate for the new centers we brought on in the September 30, all of those turned up at the same time. We did see the loads that we were expecting, in fact, Q4 loads were up a little more than 20% versus the plasma Q3 loads. But the conversion rate on those, due to the behavior of those particular customers and where they were located, led to less interchange revenue and cardholder transaction fee revenue. We have not been able to evaluate that just yet, since we're in our closing procedures for first quarter, to see how that may have changed. We expect that to improve as those performances -- and we did actually make some changes with our partners in banking in Mexico that should help with our overall gross margins on those centers, putting in place a bilateral agreement to improve the cost of ATM transactions that will help with the gross margin on those. But beyond that, I can't look too closely just yet at the revenue conversion rate for Q1.
Got it. That's helpful. And then just as a follow-up question. In terms of investment spend, I'm sure it's a little bit hard to quantify, but can you talk about some of the investment spend that you had in 2019 on things like PaySign Premier, corporate loyalty, generally, items that didn't generate much revenue. And then, how you're thinking about that number for 2020?
So I think that our CEO had touched on new hires and the build-out of patient affordability. You also see, as you look at the cash flow statement, you can see our investments in capital expenditure is about $3.2 billion, $3.3 million. So there were investments last year. It was a little higher than I anticipated early in the year of about $2.25 million to $2.5 million. Just to give you a little more insight, as we look to 2020, we've modeled in CapEx of $3.2 million to $3.7 million.
Our next question comes from Austin Moldow with Canaccord Genuity.
Of the 7 pharma contracts in 2019, how many are those still active or renewed in 2020? And how many new contracts have been signed for the remainder of 2020? And what does the pipeline look like for pharma for the rest of this year? And if there is any impact from the virus?
Sure. So with respect to pharma, just to give you a little bit of history, we ended 2018 with 3 programs. We added 7 programs in 2019, taking us to 10. We had 2 programs that ended. So we ended the year 2019 with 8 programs. And in quarter 1, we've added 2 additional programs.
Okay, got it. And can you also repeat the Q1 pharma load growth numbers you mentioned, and what those growth rates exactly related to? And how you expect -- or I'd like to understand better what you expect the cadence of pharma to be through the year?
So I'm just stepping back up to my notes. I'm looking back on my comments. The pharma loads for Q1 versus Q1 2019 increased 70%. The loads increased roughly 275% versus the fourth quarter. And this is one of the things that we've continued to reiterate with analysts and those that follow us as they ask business. As we've talked about before, the pharma business tends to be seasonal since the out-of-pocket for consumers is greatest in the first quarter prior to having met their deductibles. And at that point, you see the pharmaceutical manufacturers and our payment solution standing in and providing that assistance, that co-pay assistance, if you will.
So as I mentioned, the cash balance in February is $61 million. That tends to be a seasonal peak. Last year, it hit a seasonal peak in March. This year, it appears to be, at least for our current customers, hitting that in February. As we look forward, we do have a couple of additional clients that we just onboarded. Those will contribute to this year. And we have several new pharma clients in the pipeline, actually, in contracting, as we speak. So we're expecting some additional wins on the pharma business and that the combination of onboarding new clients along with the slow degradation on seasonality of existing pharma business should net-net lead to strong growth on a full-year basis for pharma. We saw an increase to $7 million and roughly 21% of our business was pharma in 2019. We do expect a solid growth this year. And to give you a little bit of a flavor, let me just drop back down and look at a couple of things that I thought I would share if the questions arose. We are expecting the full year mix to be approximately 65% plasma, 25% to 30% pharma and roughly 5% to 10% other business.
Great. And sorry, one last one, if I could sneak it in. Do you expect the pharma revenue conversion rate to stay roughly the same in 2020?
Yes. Don't -- I mean it's hard to predict. It's based on the performance of those programs and exactly how each new program comes on board relative to the current programs. But there's nothing at the moment that indicates that it would change, but I hedge a little bit, up or down, frankly.
[Operator Instructions]
Our next question comes from Jon Hickman with Ladenburg Thalmann.
So my question has to do with, could you give us some idea with -- about the cost of the SOX 404(b) in your audit since it was pretty extensive. I take it that won't repeat itself in Q2, but could you give us some idea of what that cost you in Q1?
Sure. So as you can probably imagine, we had to engage our auditors early last year on a regular financial audit. In the middle of the year, after we tripped the higher market cap and became accelerated filer, we signed an additional engagement where they would conduct the 404(b) assessment. If I'm not mistaken, that was somewhere around $70,000 incurred in 2019. And given the extended period of time that we encountered with our auditors in 2020, they upped that by, I believe, about an additional $50,000 in the first quarter.
And then the consulting?
The third-party advisory firm was $61,500. And that was incurred in 2019. So we've tried to limit that expense and -- go ahead.
Sounds like you did a pretty good job. So the other questions I had have been asked and answered.
Our next question comes from Peter Heckmann with Davidson.
Gentlemen, I just wanted to clarify. You went through a lot of information fairly quickly. But -- so at the end of the first quarter, it sounds as if you had 10. In pharmaceutical payment assistance you had approximately, let's see, 7, 10 -- yes, really 10 at the end of the first quarter, 2 ended in the fourth quarter, 2 were added in the first quarter. Number one, is that correct? And then number two, the pharma value loaded in the first quarter, that up 70% number, that reflects the turn of cash. You kind of gave us the walk, but -- from December to March, but that $55 million at the end of March would represent somewhere around $45 million, $46 million in restricted cash. Was that all correct?
Yes. So we ended with $10 million on roughly -- excuse me, we ended with 10 clients, you're right. And that -- the 2 that were added in the first quarter have generated very little activity to date. So those are not really reflected in our first quarter results. And yes, roughly $9.4 million to $9.5 million is unrestricted cash. So the balance is restricted on that $54 million, $55 million you quoted, correct.
Okay, great. And then just in terms of the PaySign Premier, it sounds like you directed some marketing dollars to some other initiatives. In terms of how we see that business rolling out this year, do you feel like there may be opportunities there to grow the business through other affiliates or partners? Or just in terms of near-term returns, you just -- you see relatively more potential on the pharma side?
So as Mark stated, we are marketing it to existing customers in partnership with one of our larger clients. We are continuing to test it, how to best and most economically drive customer conversions before expanding further. However, our focus has been on the kind of the larger opportunities in front of us. But we will continue to work on Premier Card also.
[Operator Instructions] Our next question comes from Austin Moldow with Canaccord Genuity.
Just 2 more, please. Though other revenues are still small, just 1% 2019 total revenue, can you talk about what card programs are in that? Is it just the DDA cards, which means that revenue is concentrated in Q4? Or are there other loyalty and incentive programs in that, too?
Yes. It's a combination of card programs. It's not any single program.
Okay. And can you talk about how those programs in other revenue -- do they have the same -- is there the same dynamic where there are loaded funds at the top and you take the revenue and there's a revenue conversion on that? And is there any color about what kind of -- if what kind of loaded funds are associated with those small programs?
So yes, it's a bit of a hybrid. Part of it is transaction processing that we're doing on the card programs. Part of it has dollars loaded to card and a traditional kind of revenue conversion rate, as you've looked at our other programs.
Okay. And last question. If you did see headwinds to the top line from the virus, is there any flexibility there with expense reductions? Or have you tested the model in a sort of worst-case scenario?
Yes, absolutely. So definitely have done some sensitivity analysis. One of the questions that we anticipated was around cash burn and cash flows. And in all of our scenarios that we've looked at, we do anticipate being cash flow positive. However, that said, we will look closely at the paycheck loan process available through the SBA that the government's announced, since employers with less than 500 employees can have access to those funds as a contingency. We're also looking at other levers as considerations as well, although we, again, expect continued positive cash flow.
Thank you. There are no further questions at this time. I'll turn it back to management for closing remarks.
So look, it's a difficult time for our country right now and for the world, and we're all digesting what's occurring, and how to protect our families and loved ones and those who we work with. With that said, please make no mistake about it, we remain as focused as ever on executing each day and each week in delivering valuable services to our clients and customers and continuing our growth and profitability. Thank you, again, for your interest, for your questions and your participation in this call. And be safe and have a good evening. And Mark, do you want to add to that?
Yes. Again, thank you, Diego, and thanks, everyone, for joining us today, and we look forward to staying in touch in future quarters. Have a nice day and you all take care and stay safe out there.
Thank you. This concludes today's conference. All parties may disconnect.
Good morning or afternoon, everyone, and welcome to the PriceSmart, Inc. Earnings Release Conference call for the Second Quarter of Fiscal Year 2020, which ended on February 29, 2020.
After remarks from our company representatives, Sherry S. Bahrambeygui, Chief Executive Officer; and Michael McCleary, Chief Financial Officer; you will be given an opportunity to ask questions as time permits. However, the company has requested that questions be limited 2 per person. As a reminder this conference call is being recorded today, Thursday, April 9, 2020. Additional replay will be available following the conclusion of today's call through April 16, 2020, by dialing 1 (877) 344-7529. For domestic callers 1 (412) 317-0088, for international callers and entering replay access code 10139915.
For opening remarks, I would now like to turn the call over to PriceSmart's Chief Financial Officer, Michael McCleary. Please proceed, sir.
Thank you, and welcome to the PriceSmart Earnings Call for the Second Quarter of Fiscal Year 2020. We will be discussing the information that we provided in our earnings press release and our 10-Q, which were both released yesterday afternoon, April 8, 2020. You can find both documents on our Investor Relations website at investors.pricesmart.com, where you can also sign up for email alerts.
As a reminder, all statements made on this conference call other than statements of historical facts, are forward-looking statements concerning the company's anticipated future plans, revenues and related matters. Forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, statements containing the words expect, believe, will, may, should, estimate and similar expressions.
All forward-looking statements are based on current expectations and assumptions as of today, April 9, 2020. These statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially, including the risks detailed in the company's annual report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2019, as filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on October 29, 2019, and the company's quarterly report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended February 29, 2020, as filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on April 8, 2020.
The company undertakes no obligation to update forward-looking statements made during this call.
Now, I will turn the call over to Sherry Bahrambeygui, PriceSmart's Chief Executive Officer.
Good morning, everyone, and thank you, Michael. In the spirit of not taking anything for granted, I want to thank everyone involved with this call who's made it possible to connect with our investors and our analysts so that we can inform you about our company's results for Q2 as well as tell you about our current activities.
Although, we're conducting this call from remote locations, I want to welcome Michael McCleary as our official ongoing Chief Financial Officer. Michael has done an excellent job as our interim CFO since December 10, 2019. He's been with the company for 16 years, and he has extensive experience with our business and our leadership team. They say you really get to know a person's true colors in times of challenge and stress. And the events of the last couple of months have revealed many more of Michael's great qualities.
So normally, I'd get right to sharing with you insights on key events that have influenced our most recent quarterly results. Our business ended the second quarter of fiscal year 2020 with strong results and good momentum. We were seeing benefits from many of the initiatives that we've been working on for the last year, and we were feeling pretty well positioned for what we thought the rest of this year would look like. Then just about a couple of weeks into our third quarter in March, the World Health Organization recognized the novel strain of coronavirus, COVID-19, as a pandemic. This virus has caused a global disruption that has touched every one of us, in some manner, including our employees and members across 13 countries. So by March, it was clear to us the world had changed and our focus quickly shifted to 5 main priorities.
So priority #1, first and foremost, and as always, protect the safety and wellbeing of our employees and our members. And now more than ever, in the face of this pandemic; priority 2, take additional steps to ensure continued operations without disruption; priority 3, take proactive measures to protect our supply chain; priority 4, get moving quickly on key projects, especially those that could expand online capabilities and find new ways to meet member demand, which was changing in response to this virus; and priority 5, manage cash and capital resources in the face of a much, much less predictable climate.
We're now into this for a little over a month. And as often happens in times of crisis and necessity, we're actually finding opportunity. We're pushing actions, new ideas and improvements that I believe will help us shape the future of our business in very positive ways. The following is a summary of some specific actions we've taken in response to the COVID outbreak. So as to priority 1 and 2, our employees, members and continued operations. We quickly off sited employees whose functions could be performed remotely with many of our key executives taking extra precautions. This was done well before government mandates, and we've been able to continue supporting all operations from off-site since approximately the second week of March.
In February, we had assembled a task force representing leadership covering all aspects of our business. This leadership team is 100% on task and communicates 7 days a week. Every day, we review in detail and plan for all of the developments in each of our 13 markets. Governmental authorities in our markets have imposed or are experimenting with policies or restrictions affecting the retail sectors of our markets, and many of these have resulted in limiting access for our members and impacting our club operations.
These limitations and restrictions change day-to-day and vary from market to market. But our team stands ready to respond real-time and is nimble in finding ways to continue to serve our members while abiding by local laws and regulations.
At the club level and throughout our distribution centers, we've implemented safety protocols to protect our heroes. Our employees who are face-to-face with the public, they're on the front line providing goods to our -- that our members really need. We're taking preventative measures such as providing personal protective equipment for them. We're installing sneeze guards for the cashiers and in other member-facing areas, we've reduced or removed in club food service. We're eliminating food sampling, we're educating our employees about best practices for good hygiene, increasing cleaning and sanitizing protocols, few.
We don't allow employees to exhibit symptoms or who live with people that are showing symptoms to come to work. And we've modified our sick leave policy to make sure that people can take paid time off without any concern about being absent.
We're also preparing for the unknown. We're building reserve teams who don't overlap with other employees, so that they can step in as needed. We report and are transparent with our employees, our members and the public when we're notified of a confirmed COVID case, and we follow health authority guidelines for quarantining and contact mapping. Thankfully, to date, we're only aware of a few confirmed cases among our approximate 9,000 employees, and we're really doing whatever we can to keep that number as low as possible. But we're getting prepared if circumstances change.
Our third focus, protecting our supply chain. Our merchandising and distribution teams are working with suppliers to make sure items are available. And by the way, I'd like to also recognize and express my gratitude to our suppliers and our vendors because we're really working together to get through the unexpected. We closely monitor inventories in our supply chain and upstream. While we've experienced some out of stocks on certain surge items, we've generally been able to maintain adequate levels on a majority of the products that our members need. But that's a dynamic situation, and we have to keep monitoring it very carefully.
And we have a contingency plan, actually a couple, in place -- in the event that a country or a region of strategic importance to our inventory flow is negatively impacted by the pandemic or they're experiencing related restrictions. Our distribution centers outside of the United States, especially the Costa Rica regional distribution center has played an important role in providing optionality and reducing the risk of interruption to the flow of critical merchandise to our markets. We've placed limits on the quantity of certain key items that members can purchase such as cleaning supplies, paper products and core shelf- stable groceries so that these essential products are available to as many members as possible. And at some clubs, we've created dedicated shopping hours for our employees as well as for seniors and other individuals most at risk.
Our fourth focus is, of course, meeting the demands of our members. Over the last few weeks, we've expedited our adoption of technological innovation and rapidly accelerated beta initiatives that allow our members to continue to shop while reducing the need for physical contact. I'm pleased to announce that we have successfully launched our online catalog that enables our members to see almost real-time the availability of products for all clubs. Then leveraging this capability and to best accommodate our members within the restrictions, we've already launched our first click-and-go program in Costa Rica.
Our members can go online, look at the catalog of products in the club, order them, pay online, drive to the club and have goods placed in their car, reducing almost any physical interaction with our employees. This is being rolled out very quickly to our other markets as well.
In tandem with this, we're enhancing our member experience and increasing our digital connections with our members through our new PriceSmart app, which our members seem to like, as we're seeing a rapid increase in the number of sign-ups and renewals using the app. The talent and technology we obtained through PriceSmart's acquisition of Aeropost has proven to play a very important role in enabling these capabilities in this compressed period of time. At some clubs, we also provide assisted shopping, which allows a member to order by phone for pick up or for delivery. We've increased our capacity for delivery by our own employees as well as through delivery services.
In fact, in one country where retailers were ordered to temporarily close, the government granted PriceSmart permission to operate as a drive-through, to provide pre-built basic commodity bags that we call smart bags, while requiring minimum time or physical contact between the employee and the member.
We're also working to deploy our workforce in a thoughtful manner, including by developing a program to teach employee skills so that they can support our efforts to provide members with additional alternative ways to shop.
PriceSmart is also working with nonprofits, including Price Philanthropies to provide these basic commodity smart bags to people in need and to support the communities in which we operate. I'm so incredibly proud of how our team has quickly adapted and is creatively responding to the challenges we're facing while preparing for what might be next.
Our fifth focus, cash management. Given the uncertainties surrounding the potential impact of the outbreak on our results of operations and cash flows, we are proactively taking steps to access and preserve cash available on hand. We've also decided to delay certain capital expenditures. We plan to complete the construction of our warehouse club in Liberia, Costa Rica, next month, but we postponed its opening.
With respect to our previously announced future warehouse club openings on land that we've acquired in Bogota and Bucaramanga, Colombia and in Jamaica, we've decided to suspend or not initiate the construction of those clubs for the time being. The reality is, we really don't know yet how long the situation will continue. So we've curtailed discretionary spending and are considering and planning for additional cost-saving measures in the U.S. and in the markets where we operate. You'll hear more about managing our liquidity from Michael.
So now with that, let me turn to the original purpose of this call, our FY 2020 Q2 results. Total revenues were a new record for the company of $906.7 million, an increase of 6.1% over the comparable prior year period. Net merchandise sales were $871.7 million, an increase of 6.3% over the prior year period. We did benefit from the extra day in this leap year.
The second quarter increase resulted from a 5.9% increase in transactions and a 0.3% increase in average ticket. Currency fluctuations in our markets had a $2.9 million or 30 basis point, 0.3% negative impact on net merchandise sales for the quarter.
Comparable net merchandise sales increased by 0.4%, with currency fluctuations impacting comparable sales negatively by 0.4%. By segment, in Central America, where we had 25 clubs at quarter end, net merchandise sales increased 8.3% with a 0.1% increase in comparable net merchandise sales. The impact of currency on total and comparable sales to the Central American REIT segment was positive 1.6% and positive 1.7%, respectively.
All markets within this segment showed increased net merchandise sales year-on-year. In Panama, we opened our sixth club in May 2019 and seventh club in October 2019. And in Guatemala, we opened our fourth club in November 2019. Our comparable store net merchandise sales were negatively impacted by these 3 new club openings.
In the Caribbean region, where we had 13 clubs at quarter end, total net merchandise sales grew 4.9% with comparable net merchandise sales growth of 1.3%. Our Dominican Republic and Jamaica market led the way in this segment with 17.4% and 10.5% growth for the second quarter ended February 29, 2020.
In the Dominican Republic, this growth was primarily attributable to the opening of our fifth club in June 2019. While in Jamaica, strong comparable net merchandise sales growth was the primary driver of growth for the second quarter ended February 29, 2020.
Jamaica, it's at a new all-time monthly sales record for the company. Their bakery alone did $1.6 million in sales in the month of December, another record, which was enabled in part by the investment we previously made to expand the club and add parking.
The impact of currency on both total and comparable merchandise sales for the Caribbean segment was negative 2%. In Colombia, where we have 7 clubs, net merchandise sales grew 0.2% for the quarter, and there was a decrease in comparable net merchandise sales of 0.6%. The impact of currency on total and comparable net merchandise sales in Colombia was significant at negative 6.1% and negative 6.4%, respectively.
With regard to merchandise, in terms of consolidated merchandise categories, we experienced good growth in our fresh category, driven primarily by growth in our prepared foods, poultry and produce departments. We also saw favorable growth in departments such as pet supplies, toys, tires and sporting drinks, health and beauty as well as electronics and the appliances category within hardline.
Now let's turn to membership. At the end of Q2, we continued to report very positive results. We ended the quarter with approximately 1.7 million accounts, also a new company record and a 3% increase over the prior year period. Membership income was up by 9.7% during the quarter. The growth in accounts and income during fiscal 2020 can be primarily attributed to the opening of 4 new warehouse clubs compared to last year in our Central American and Caribbean market.
Membership income in our Colombian market has also been positively impacted by a 20% increase in the Diamond membership fee beginning in April 2019. Our trailing 12-month renewal rate was 86% and 85% for the periods ended February 29, 2020, and February 28, 2019, respectively.
Our Platinum membership, which offers cash back based on purchase volume in exchange for a higher annual fee represents approximately 4.5% of our total membership base and has been growing. Total gross margins this quarter increased to 16.6% from 16.1% in Q2 fiscal 2019.
Gross margin when compared to the prior year period was impacted mostly by favorable net merchandise margins. Net merchandise margins for Q2 increased 70 basis points to 14.7% from 14.0% versus the same period a year ago, which is in line with our preceding 2 quarters and prior year's historical trends.
Net income for the second quarter of fiscal year 2020 grew 7.6% to $25.6 million or $0.85 per share compared to $23.8 million or $0.79 per share in the comparable period last year.
Now remember, we ended this quarter with 45 warehouse clubs compared to 41 clubs at the end of the second quarter of fiscal year '19. The new clubs include 2 in Panama referred to as Veraguas and Metropark, and 1 in the Dominican Republic, the Bolivar club; and most recently, the San Cristobal club that opened in November of 2019 in Guatemala.
So now briefly turning to March sales, which we released earlier this week. Net merchandise sales were $306.1 million, an increase of 17.1% versus a year ago. FX fluctuations adversely impacted net merchandise sales by 2.5%. For the 4 weeks ended March 29, 2020, comparable net merchandise sales increased 15.7% with a negative FX impact of 3%. Although overall sales for the month of March 2020 increased significantly, driven by members stocking up primarily on food and essentials ahead of the potential shelter in place advisories.
Sales did moderate and later decreased in the second half of the month. Toward the end of March, we experienced a noticeable reduction in traffic that we believe was driven by restrictive government mandates and consumer concerns about potential exposure.
So to wrap up, we posted strong results for Q2 and strong sales for March. Our efforts to recommit to the Sixth Right during the preceding year was showing results on key metrics. We also recognize that a lot is changing, and there are many unknowns at this time. Therefore, it's difficult to predict when and how our members' consumption and spending patterns will adjust to a new normal. As we sit here today, we expect the impact of the pandemic and the related restrictions on our business to adversely affect traffic and sales over the next several months. And we recognize that the financial impact that COVID-19 will have on our market could also cause a downward trend in sales for some time.
Having said that, we also see this as an opportunity. We've learned a lot in the last 6 weeks about what our team is capable of accomplishing. Everyone from our club and distribution center operators, to the executive team, everyone at all levels. It's nothing short of inspiring. Our team has talent, resolve, and a tremendous commitment to our members into this company, and we have loyal members who really count on us as a trusted source of goods.
A lot of families depend on us, especially in times like this. So we're treating this as a call to action. We've already covered a lot of ground and made a lot of progress on several fronts that will carry us forward long after this chapter ends. And we intend to seize on the opportunities rising from this challenge, to propel our business forward and position ourselves for the future. I'm hoping you and your families stay safe and healthy.
I'll now turn this over to Michael.
Thank you, Sherry, and good morning or afternoon to everyone in my first earnings conference call as Chief Financial Officer. First, I would like to thank Sherry, the Board and all of my other PriceSmart colleagues for their support during my interim CFO phase, which has now led to this permanent position. However, I would also like to acknowledge the difficult times we are all facing through the COVID-19 crisis and extend my heartfelt best wishes to everybody on this call today, as I imagine you all have been either directly or indirectly impacted by this crisis.
As Sherry discussed earlier, the second quarter of fiscal 2020, total revenues were $906.7 million, an increase of 6.1% and gross margins rose 50 basis points to 16.6% compared to 16.1% in the second quarter of fiscal 2019. Total SG&A as a percentage of total revenue were 12.3%, an increase of 50 basis points versus the same period last year. The increase year-over-year was primarily driven by additional head count related to the opening of our 4 newest clubs and investments in talent to support our technology development and other administrative functions.
Operating income was $38.8 million or 4.3% of total revenues in Q2 of fiscal 2020 compared to $36.5 million or 4.3% of total revenue for the same period last year. The improvement is largely due to higher net merchandising margins in the second quarter of fiscal 2020 versus the same period last year, partially offset by an increase in SG&A expenses due to our 4 new clubs, as indicated earlier.
Our effective tax rate for the second quarter of fiscal 2020 was essentially flat versus the prior year, coming in at 33.1% versus a rate of 32.9% a year ago. While over the last few years, we have generally provided an indication of our expectations for our full year effective tax rate, due to the current COVID- related uncertainties and projecting full year results, we are unable to provide such an indication at this time.
Net income increased 7.6% to $25.6 million with diluted earnings per share of $0.85 in the second quarter of fiscal 2020 compared to $23.8 million with diluted earnings per share of $0.79 from the second quarter of last year.
Moving on to the balance sheet. We ended the quarter with cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash of $136.8 million, an increase of $38.7 million versus the same period a year ago. Cash provided by operating activities increased $12.8 million versus the same period last year, primarily due to higher net income and working capital improvements.
Net cash used in investing activities increased by $31.9 million, primarily due to net increases in purchases of short-term investments and construction payments during the year. Net cash provided by financing activities increased $44.3 million, primarily due to new long-term borrowings in our Colombian and Guatemalan subsidiaries.
Turning now to the impact of the coronavirus outbreak and how this is affecting us in terms of liquidity. We are implementing measures to preserve our liquidity and strengthen our balance sheet during these unprecedented times. We are reevaluating additional needs for liquidity given the potential social and economic impacts in the markets where we operate and any resulting impacts on our results of operations and cash flow.
While we cannot reasonably estimate the duration or severity of this pandemic at this time, it is likely that we will see some negative impacts, especially on sales over at least the near term. Therefore, as a precautionary measure, early in Q3, we have accessed $63.2 million of funding available in several of our lines of credit to increase available cash on hand.
Additionally, as Sherry mentioned, we have postponed the construction and opening of 4 new clubs, which will reduce our capital expenditures and working capital needs significantly in the short term, while we continue to evaluate the situation and the duration of the disruption.
Finally, we are working with all our merchandise and other vendors to extend payment terms and thus create additional liquidity. In closing, our business remained very strong during Q2, and we had great momentum leading into this worldwide crisis. Our second quarter results were excellent and validate the strategies we have in place are the right ones. These results highlighted that sales, margins and membership renewals continued to show strong results and strengthen the core of our business.
With that said, our environment has suddenly changed with the outbreak of COVID-19. With each passing week, during this crisis, we continue to evolve and adapt to the ever-changing landscape we face -- find ourselves in. We will continue to focus on the Six Rights, our employees, our members and our communities. We will keep you updated as the conditions continue to progress in the coming months.
As we turn to the Q&A section of this call, I would like to remind you all that we have never provided earnings guidance. And with this unprecedented situation we are currently enduring it will be even harder to give you all a good sense as to how severely and for how long our results will be impacted by the situation. In any case, if you have any questions related to how we are executing our COVID-19 response initiatives, we will do our best to answer them.
As mentioned at the beginning of this call, we would appreciate it if you could limit your questions to 2 per person. Operator, I will turn it back to you to take up to 2 questions from each of our callers.
[Operator Instructions] First question comes from Rodrigo Echagaray with Scotiabank.
Congrats, Michael, on your new role. I would say, on my end, I'd like to perhaps hear your thoughts on what will it take for you to revisit store openings? And I guess, more specifically, is this related more to the temporary disruptions on COVID-19? Or is it more related to structural concerns with regards to the region where you operate in terms of the macro short to mid-term?
And I guess the second question would be on the e-commerce front. What kind of growths are you seeing in the past few days? Any color that you can share with us would be great.
Rodrigo, so if I understand your first question was basically our decision to suspend some of the store openings or the club openings, and you wanted a little color about -- around that, correct?
Yes, I mean I guess, how are you thinking about that? I mean I guess I'm trying to get a sense on -- are we perhaps being obviously responsible and cautious for obvious reasons. But once disruptions cease and everything goes back to "normal", then are we looking at those store openings being back on the pipeline quickly? Or is it something that it will take a few months until you feel comfortable putting those back in the pipeline?
Well, let me put it to you this way. Before the pandemic, we were completely on track for those openings. So it wasn't anything structural or in terms of the market themselves that led us to decide not to do it. It was the pandemic. And then of course, the resulting impact of the pandemic can and may have on these markets going forward, which is really the part that is the big unknown for all of us at this point.
So with that kind of a variable at play, the best answer I can give you is that we're just monitoring it.
We're trying to get the best information we can and assess what the impact on our markets are, and then at the appropriate time we will move forward. So as of now, it seems that the most prudent thing to do in the face of this kind of unexpected event was to suspend that and to preserve capital and focus on delivering our best performance for our members with the clubs that we have in the markets where we exist.
Got it.
Your second question related to e-commerce growth. E-commerce, it's hard to quantify. Again, this is all happening so quickly. I can tell you anecdotally that the response we're getting, we track social media now and we're much more connected to our members digitally. We're seeing the response and the reaction to having more online presence, the fact that our members can go now online and see our products, order them, pay for them, at least in our first location so far. And that's all been extremely favorable.
Now it's about building up quickly, ramping up the operational side to be able to support the demand. So I can't quantify for you what the demand is, but you can sort of assume that when people don't want to leave their home or if they do leave their home, they don't want to spend a lot of time being exposed to other people who might be carrying the virus. There's a real demand for e-commerce, and there's a real demand for all of the types of shopping that you can do that minimizes physical interaction with other people. And that's what we're focused on, and that's what we've been expediting and making great progress on in a very short period of time.
And so I guess, can you maybe share if all the stores or an x percentage of the stores have now the ability to -- for customers to shop online and maybe do click and collect, how many stores are we looking at that are capable of doing this?
Well, okay, if you look at the capabilities, the first step is to make sure that all the inventory that's available in the clubs is visible online. So having the online catalog that shows a description, the price, the -- whether or not the product is available, that now exists in all of our countries. So that's a development that's happened since this pandemic was announced.
Then you add on that the ability to -- once you have that information, it opens the doors to the alternative ways of shopping. One is the ability to e-mail or through phone conversations, contact a PriceSmart employee and be able to get an order or order something to be picked up or delivered. That's what we're calling assisted shopping. That's happening throughout a number of our clubs at this time.
The most advanced right now is the click and collect, which is -- I'm sorry, the Click and Go, which is in -- we launched it in Costa Rica, in our Santa Ana club, and that's been going extremely well. And we have a very aggressive rollout plan to all of our other markets in a matter of weeks. So we started with one, make sure we got the kinks out and we're doing it right and set up the protocol so that we can efficiently roll this out throughout the rest of the company.
That sounds like you guys have really stepped it up in the last few weeks, which makes a lot of sense. And on the delivery, if I can just maybe double-click on that for a second. I think you're...
Okay. You're -- just so you know officially you're on question number four, but it's okay, go ahead.
I'm sorry about that. I'm just going to leave it at that -- and hopefully, somebody else.
It's okay, Rodrigo, I'm just giving you hard time.
No, I know. I know. It's just that I have a lot of questions, but I'll let other ones take turns.
That's okay. Why don't you ask that last one, that's fine?
Now, it's just on the delivery. I mean you were mentioning you're using both some aggregators and also you're doing some of that in-house. Can you maybe share more color on both of those strategies?
Yes. As you know, given the fact that we operate in 13 different markets, the best solutions vary from market to market. In Colombia, we partner with Rappi, as one example. And it's not a one solution for each market. It varies. We do a combination of -- to having our own employees delivering. We've got -- we've secured vehicles that allow for us to be able to do deliveries, we partner with third parties. And we are right at -- on the brink of finalizing contracts with another major delivery service, if you will, that will be able to provide this service to our members throughout most of our markets. So it's a combination of different channels that allow us to get the product to the members.
Next question comes from Jon Braatz of Kansas City Capital.
As you tackle this COVID-19 issue, what kind of flexibility do you have in your cost structure at the store level? And have you been making adjustments there? I was just curious what may be potentially some deleveraging of expenses, how you're going to try and minimize that deleveraging of expenses?
Well, with regard to that, we're watching every penny as we should. And Michael is doing a great job of that. And we have eliminated or reduced what we consider to be any sort of excess. But having said that, we think it's very important to have a balanced approach, especially during this time. The initial instinct may be to just hunker down and dial back on everything.
But what we're actually finding is because of the situation, our team is able to move forward pretty quickly on interventions and on new initiatives that, frankly, we didn't know we could deliver on as quickly as we have. And in that effort, we're realizing we actually need to deploy our resources and our labor in a more thoughtful way because there's opportunities here to now reskill some of our employees and assign them tasks that will support these initiatives that we believe are not only needed by our members today, but are going to strengthen our company for the long term.
So while we're watching expenses and we're being vigilant about that and taking -- as responsible and as compassionate an approach as we possibly can, we're also not shy about making the right investments in the right areas that are going to get us through this stronger than we were coming into it.
Okay. Okay. The second question, Sherry, what are you seeing or maybe it's a little bit early, on the membership -- or new membership count. I saw that in Colombia, memberships were down year-over- year, up elsewhere. But how are your markets? how are the -- how are your -- how is memberships rolls as we get further and further into this COVID-19, are we seeing any material difference in the trend that we've seen over the last couple of years?
Well, I can't -- I don't have in front of me, March, but in terms -- I don't think we report anything in a partial month. So we're in April right now. So I can't really share anything more on that. But certainly, people right now are behaving differently in terms of what they're buying, how much they're buying, we're seeing surges, and then we're seeing changes in terms of average ticket and so on. But it's too soon for me to be able to share any kind of trend that I could predict or see emerging as a result of the membership.
Okay. All right. One last question. If the product mix shifts more to necessities as opposed to other items that aren't so essential. How does that influence your gross margins? How is -- a mix shift like that?
Well, I mean we're constantly trying to manage margins appropriately. We are continually looking for ways to make sure that we are getting the best value for the member consistent with the Six Rights. As we see a greater need for essentials and basic necessities, we're leveraging local vendors as well and suppliers to make sure that we are able to deliver the products that they need. So at this point, it's, again, too soon to tell what will come out of this phase of a dramatic shift in the way that people are shopping. And the demand as well as the supply and -- but beyond that, I really don't have any more to share in terms of foresight.
Okay. All right. A lot of imponderables out there, and I wish you the best luck. It's a difficult environment.
We really appreciate your well wishes, and we're doing the best we can and we're feeling good about our ability to get through this and take care of our members and learn a lot in the process.
This concludes our question-and-answer session. The conference has now concluded. Thank you for attending today's presentation. You may now disconnect.
Greetings and welcome to the Pure Cycle Corporation 2020 Second Quarter and 6-Month Financial Conference. [Operator Instructions] It is now my pleasure to introduce you to your speaker, Mark Harding. Mr. Harding, you may begin.
Thank you, and I'd like to welcome you all to our second quarter call. Some housekeeping measures. We do have a slide deck for this. So if you want to log in to our website, it should be on the front landing page. It'll just say second quarter presentation. If you don't see it there, then you can surf over to the Investors section, and there'll be a link there as well. So that'll allow you to follow along with the presentation and the prepared remarks.
I'm going to beg forgiveness for those of you who are new to the company. Probably just jump into sort of the quarter end without giving kind of the overview -- typical overview of the company. We've got some excellent resources on our website if you're new to the company and want to get a little bit more color about sort of how we do things and how we got to where we are. There's a couple of podcasts on there that will give you that presentation.
But with that, let me go ahead and start the call here. And the first thing I need to do is while I said I was going to go through the presentation quickly, I got to get through at least the second slide, which is to get the lawyers out of the room, saying that this is our safe harbor statement, and really, these are our forward-leading statements not intended to be policy or direction or guidance to our investors.
So with that, I'm going to roll -- scroll you guys down to Slide 6 and really start by giving you all an update into our land development segment and give you kind of an update of the activity that we've had.
As you all know, we've got a very large master plan community located in the I-70 corridor here in the Denver metropolitan area. We've embarked on our first phase of that, which includes a little over 500 lots. We have 3 national homebuilders that are under contract for all of our homes -- all our lots on that. We have Richmond America, Taylor Morrison and KB, and all 3 of them are very active in building homes out there.
We have -- of the 506 lots, I think we've delivered about 380 of the 506 lots. So there's really just 2 more takedowns. I think Richmond has taken down all of their lots. Taylor Morrison has one more takedown requirement -- one more takedown of lots, which will be about 49 lots. And then I think KB has another 50 lots, and they're going to be, plus or minus, maybe a little bit more than 50 lots. I think they've got maybe 2 more takedown schedules.
The really nice thing about our project here is all 3 of our builders have accelerated their takedowns from their original contract schedules, mostly due to, really, the success that this project has had. We've had a great entry into the market, mostly because of our price point. Our price point is an entry-level price point. Our homes start in sort of the kind of [ 3 40, 3 50 ] range. That's -- as sad as that may sound, that's the starter home in the Denver market. But we have a real mix of homeowners out there. We have had our first, sort of share -- our homeowner community meeting and got a chance to meet with a number of those folks. We have about 7 -- a little more than 70 people occupying houses out there. And the first community meeting was a huge success. I think we had more than 42 homes represented -- families from 42 homes represented. I will throw a shout out there to KB who gave us one of their model homes for the meeting place there, and they gave us some things to snack on there. So I give them a shout out and thank them for that. But the project is going great.
In addition to the actual occupied homes, we probably got, I'd say, 120, 130 homes under construction. So I'd say we're right close to 200 homes either built or under construction. We've got -- I'm going to -- let me pull that back -- about 180 building permits issued. So you can't get started on a home until you've actually got a building permit.
We have paid tap fees. So in addition to selling lots, as many of you know, we are a water utility, and we keep that track of that metric as well. We've got about 217 water and wastewater taps purchased from our homebuilders. And then how this is likely to roll out for the rest of this first phase, we'll deliver the remaining 127 lots through calendar year-end. So there's -- of those 3 or 4 more closings, those are staggered throughout the rest of the year. So you'll see announcements as we get those closed. I'll likely send out a press release for each of those announcements to let everybody know how those are progressing through.
I'll move to the next slide, Slide 7, that will kind of give you both a visual as well as a numerical representation of the progress since Q1. So you can see we are having a tremendous start, and then we're really just getting into the building season. So we've got a number of new homes. I'd say 70 residents as we were describing, and I think home builders are averaging about 6 homes per month per builder. So that absorption has been very exciting over the winter. We'll see how that continues to progress in this new environment that we're in. And we'll talk a little bit more about that later in the presentation.
Move to Slide 8. Slide 8 will really kind of give you a view of the rest of the project. 1,000 -- that's about 935 acres in total. So this first 155 acres is really just the first entry into that. And as you can see, I want to highlight really the next residential component of that. The next phase incorporates 480 acres, and there's much more than just the residential component. We have a large commercial component, which is going to be up along the interstate. So we have about a half a mile of frontage along the interstate, and we have our own interchange that's existing right at the exit to the property. But we're going to focus in on kind of the next residential component of that, and we have a very broad product mix in our next residential component.
If you flip to the next page, that will kind of give you kind of a land plan layout. And really, the mix is going to be more than -- we have kind of -- in our first phase, we just had 2 product mixes, a 45-foot and a 50-foot lot. Those are pretty homogeneous that did allow the builders to be able to take a wide variety of homes on those sites, but it was still a pretty typical stand-alone detach single-family house. In the next phase, we'll have a little bit more density on the per acre on that. We'll have some smaller lots, a 32-foot single family, 45s and 50s like the first phase. We'll have some paired product out there, which means we'll have some duplexes and then some townhome product where we'll have clusters. And so it relatively does speak to a much larger customer base, a much more diversified product offering amongst the number of builders that we're looking at.
We'll likely phase this in -- so this will be our second phase, but we'll probably have 4 micro phases here. As you can kind of see, we've set that up where you can see each phase is somewhere in the 230 to 260 lot deliveries. And so it allows us to be able to manage our construction costs, so we don't get too far out developing those lots before we move on to the next increment.
I think we did a very good job of efficiently delivering the first 500 lots in our first phase. And so we don't want to stray too far away from that model because I think that was very good, not only for our builders so that they didn't have to inventory too much as well as the company, so we didn't have to inventory too much in terms of the development cost. So we can do a lot of those land, like the earthwork. Maybe we carve that up into 2 phases, but we can carve up the utilities and the roads, curves and gutters into 4 phases so that we're much more real time in delivering those. So that's I know important to our shareholders because they want to make sure that we're using our capital wisely. We're not putting too much into our work in progress, or WIP, on that without having our builders kind of there with us payment progresses.
I think our contracts are going to look very similar in the second phase as they looked in the first phase where we're going to get maybe 1/3, 1/3, 1/3 delivery schedule where we'll get paid a portion of the lot cost -- of finished lot costs as we plot the property and then a progress payment as we deliver wet utilities and then a final progress payment as we deliver the final lot -- final finished lot.
Pricing is probably going to be a little bit stronger. I would like to be able to disclose that pricing to you. I think we know -- I have a pretty good idea about that. But until we get our contracts finalized with each of our builders, I'm going to keep that in our pocket, and we'll look forward to giving you that guidance as that becomes available to us.
Let's move on to Page 10. So Page 10, as you know, we also supply water and wastewater services. And one of the biggest activities that we have in the water segment is supplying water to the oil and gas industry when the oil and gas industry existed. They seem to have taken a hiatus this year just mostly due to the price of oil. We did have some repositioning of the assets in the field. So our largest operator, ConocoPhillips, had sold their position in this field to a group called -- a private company called Crestone Peak Resources. You can Google them and find out a little bit more about them. But they're almost exclusively owned by Canadian pension funds. So they operate a little bit differently than maybe a public E&P company. They really do have a long-term focus. I've been very impressed with their management and their leadership. In point of the transition, how they've handled the transition, the communication channels that we have with them, about how they look to take a look at the field and then also what's going on in the current market, with oil in the mid-20s now, which is a significant improvement than it was maybe 6 or 7 days ago, but looking at oil in the low 20s, it certainly puts a lot of pressure on E&P companies' ability to really invest into a field right now. And so I think most of their activity is on hold for 2020 in terms of new exploration. One of the things that they did have as a carryover from ConocoPhillips is they have 13 wells that Conoco had drilled and completed on the drilling side, but they hadn't fracked those wells. So if you look at some of the low-hanging fruit and they look at this as to say based on -- we'll make a sort of a month-to-month assessment based on the price of oil as to how we want to pick up and the timing of completing those wells so that they can get those in production and really a very modest investment to bring on production or at least complete those wells and hold those leases by production. So there's a little bit of opportunity for us to have some activity on that, but I don't have a lot of guidance on that because they don't have a lot of guidance just yet.
Moving to the next slide, Slide 11. Let me give you some of the financial metrics, our water assets. So our assets are going up -- continue to go up from year-end last year as well as do our cash and investments. So you always want to own companies that have increasing assets as well as increasing cash position. That usually means that they're making money. And this is one of those areas where we find ourselves in a very unique position where we're very strong and very highly appreciating asset base and a very strong and not making very much money, but a lot of liquidity within the company.
I'm sorry, let me take that -- that could be misinterpreted. We are making a lot of money. Our cash is not making a lot of money right now.
Let me roll to the next slide, Slide 12. That gives you kind of the metrics on the P&L. Operating revenues, that's a 6-month number, $14 million over what was last year. So we're a little bit ahead of where we were this month -- this time last year. And then growth in income from continuing operations on the share basis, $0.25 a share. And then profitability, if you take a look at the net income after-tax, we are -- we have used up all our tax credits. So now I end up having to send some of those dollars to help support that $2 trillion benefit package that Washington has sent out. But we're now happy to be reporting a very good margin after-tax profit.
Page 13 will give you kind of a breakdown on where that money is coming from. So if you look at the land development segment, a little over $10.8 million on lot sales. The tap fee revenue is about $2.8 million. So we're getting a good monetization of the equity value that we have in our water system. What has fallen off is obviously fracking water revenues. So very nominal revenue for this fiscal year in the fracking revenue. We really haven't had a single frac in this fiscal year. That revenue that you see there, that $57,000 is sort of incidental water that would be going to a pad site for any construction activity in the pad side water compaction or a number of things like that.
And then we also have some oil and gas minerals. And what you see is kind of a substantial tick up in our oil and gas royalties, and that was because Conoco had drilled and completed another 4-well pad site on some of our land. And if you remember, we have 2 sections where we carry forward net mineral interest on that. This is in the smaller portion of that. We have 1/8th pooling in -- where these 4 wells are. And then in the other pooling interest, we have 3/8 of that. So this is even in the smaller well pooling. So it gives you kind of an impact on the fact that this is a very oil-rich field and -- but for the price of oil being in the 20s, would be being developed on a pretty aggressive basis. And so there will be cycles in that. This too will end in terms of the pricing war that we have currently in the oil sector, and we will continue to be able to monetize that in terms of our mineral estate as well as the opportunity to share our water assets and sell water for fracking revenue.
Next slide, balance sheet impact. So that gives you a kind of a period-over-period balance sheet impact. And then on the Slide 15, sort of the P&L. One of the non-GAAP measures there that I think is good to keep track of is our sort of our EBITDA -- our non-GAAP EBITDA there. So you got $8.7 million for the 6 months ending. So when you look at sort of trending on how's the company doing with its assets, your investment into these assets over those many years has really started to really benefit our shareholders and really provide value to that.
So with that, I do want to spend a little bit of time talking about sort of our unique -- the world that we're in sort of today and talk about some of our response to the virus impacts. Water and wastewater are essential services. So we're one of those exempt industries, and our employees are exempt. So our day-to-day operations are pretty much -- pretty normal. I would say, our field crews are pretty, I'd say, standard. We have the typical folks that are going to be in and out of a flu season. We are very particular about if somebody is sick. We want them to stay home. We give them -- the company -- as an employee- centric company, we have a very generous PTO policy. So we want to make sure that, one, they take care of their health, but then they also make sure that we take care of all of our coworkers' health as well. But that said, we do have to be on site. We do have to make sure that the water keeps flowing and wastewater keeps being processed.
Our office personnel, probably 80-20 mix, where we have 80% of the people still commuting to the office. We try to stick to our offices and maintain our distances from each other just to have best practices and make sure that we have continued healthy professionals here. But we do have some folks that have a type of job responsibility where they can commute from home, and they do a very efficient job and are very productive of being able to do that. Some of our engineers and accounting staff can do some of that stuff remotely.
Our builders continue to complete the houses that they have under contract. They have said that their walkthroughs, the on-site traffic is down substantially, and that's really primarily because Colorado, like I think most states in the U.S., are on sort of a stay-at-home period where other than essential activities, they're sort of discouraging that essential activities. That said, the construction industry itself is classified as essential. So while they may not have a lot of construction, they do have a lot of contracts and a lot of homes that are in the pipeline, and there's -- there continues to be a lot of activity on site. So those homes that had started construction or that they have contracts for, they continue to start new starts. They continue to complete those homes because they have specific delivery time lines on that, and we have to support that. So our field crews are out there setting meters, making sure that we have inspections on water and sewer lines and all that activity.
What else? I think I did mention the oil and gas activity. That has been deferred for 2020. But again, there are 13 wells that are sort of that low-hanging fruit, and we'll see how the -- our new partner looks to capitalize on being able to invest in those new activities and -- I'm sorry, those existing wells to frac those and bring those things on to market.
If you take a look at our Phase 2. We are in conversation with as many as 7 different builders. We don't think we have room for all 7 builders, but we have -- we've sort of put it in front of 7 national homebuilders, and all 7 want to be in the project, and we're trying to balance out each individual builder with what their product specialties are. So some builders specialize on paired products. Some builders have townhome products. Some builders have alley load product and some builders don't. And so we want to figure out and really find a market segmentation for each of the builders to be able to get them to have some value proposition of doing what they do well, segment out the different types of players that we have on the site and really looking to finalize those agreements within the next 90 days. Our opportunity would be to be able to be under construction and be in the ground sometime late this year. I would say, I keep saying September, October, but because of where we're at with our current market conditions, I'm looking for maybe November, December time frame. So we'll see how this continues on. But still being in a position where we can deliver lots for -- that sometime in 2021 time frame, and then they can start constructing on some of their model homes and then be really opportunistic by selling some of what their product is. So some of the builders that we have in our first phase have a strong interest in being in our second phase as well as some new builders. So looking at how that traffic is going to go through the winter of '21 as well, so they can continue to build through the seasons on that.
So with that, what I'd like to do is turn it back over to the moderator, maybe open it up to some questions. I know you all probably have a lot of questions about how we're handling all of the activity and sort of what this current market conditions might impact on the company. So with that, I'll turn it back over.
[Operator Instructions] Our first question comes from [ Elliot Knight ] of [ Knight Advisors ].
You haven't said anything on the call about the commercial. You've got 160 acres that you highlight there. Could you tell us what your plans are there and what the time table -- what timetable do you anticipate?
Great question. So while I'm very excited about the residential component of that, and that's kind of where a lot of my attention has been occupied just solidifying those contracts with the builders. You're right, we have a very large commercial component to this property. And commercial usually lags on our commercial piece but not really to the point where we have found the right opportunity yet. A lot of the interest, I would say, 70% of the calls and the serious calls on it have been people that want to put it under contract and then they want to market to somebody who's actually going to develop. And we have the flexibility to be able to go from our position to a direct user rather than having an intermediary in there, not that we're going to be building it or not that we think that we have for -- significant value independent of somebody that would say, I want to buy 5 acres and then I want to bring a deal to Walmart or to Kroger. Certainly, those are the opportunities to do that. And if they have that type of structure, that's where we are interested.
We look at commercial where it has opportunities for both retail and commercial. So you'll have a lot of employment base. It'll have a lot of product offerings where you can get -- you'll have the typical Walmarts, Targets, big-box stores, Home Depots, the fast casuals, on the restaurant side, sort of a mixed use of really all different types of retail and commercial uses out there. And so we're looking at kind of the right model. And each time we kind of configure our land plan, we're looking at some of the demographics that we have on that and what those demographics can bring to the type of retail or commercial player that's there. But I would say that still -- if I scale this on saying, on a 1 to 10, where I've got people building, 10 would be, I've got people building commercial installations out there and 1 being somebody made a call to us on it. I'd say we're at a 3, 4 range on that. So I think we're still pretty early on that. I would expect that to pick up probably in the next 18 months as we get closer to the 500 homes that are under -- that are occupied, and we get a lot more traffic out at Sky Ranch where they can kind of monitor rooftops and fences counts out there for getting a lifetime or getting a fitness center out there or getting a would so that we are participating more in the end value of that, not necessarily building the value on it, but participating more on the end value by just being patient with it.
So we're there now. How far do they have to drive to a supermarket, to a Home Depot, to a theater?
So it will be -- it's almost triangulated, and it's almost about 10 miles in 3 different directions. There'll be 10 miles to the west, or I'll call it, 8 miles to the west, 10 miles to the south and 11 miles to the east to find those types of installations. So we're very well located on that. And really, there's not much opportunity on land other than ours because they don't have the interchange that would give you that accessibility and that kind of the transportation network to the site itself.
Which makes our commercial all the more attractive.
It does. And it has several things. I mean, one, you do benefit a lot in the value of commercial real estate. And we also benefit from the value of a commercial water user out of that. So we see value not only in the land. We see value in taps. We see value in selling water. But then there's a tremendous value here in Colorado for reimbursables. And I know I've talked about that in the past. But when you take a look at how Colorado is incentivized, our commercial real estate generates 4x the equivalent AV that a residential AV has. And so it does allow us to really capitalize on our full reimbursables. And we did do a bond offering. I talked about that in our last call, which really encompassed about 35% of the reimbursables that we accrued for the first phase, but that was valuing all of that residential. So when you look at it, we'll have -- we should have surplus revenue when you add in the commercial component. So that will become a very important component for us to help realize and help monetize some of those accrued reimbursables.
[Operator Instructions] Our next question comes from Bill Miller with J.M. Hartwell.
Things sounds they're going really well. If you looked out 3 years, let's say, I want to know how -- what percentage of your revenue at that time will be recurring. And not the tap sales or land sales or whatever. But what percentage will be recurring at that point?
So what I would say is that really drills down into kind of the water connections, the monthly -- month- over-month, year-over-year connections that we have into the system. Today, we stand somewhere around -- pretty close to 500 water connections and then I think maybe 180 sewer connections. And the reason we've got a disconnect between the water and the sewer connections is we have a lot of irrigation connections. So we have more water that doesn't create sewer than water that is in a house creating sewer. Those will catch up as we get more of the single family residents, but we'll still have more water connections than we'll have sewer connections. But within 3 years, I think we're built out on at least the first phase of the 500. So adding -- that would probably add another 400 connections. So we'll more than -- I would say just in the first phase of Sky Ranch, we'll more than double the size and the connections that we have there.
We continue to do well on our acquisition down at Wild Pointe. So that continues to build out. So year- over-year, I think we're up almost 70% from when we bought that in terms of the number of connections that are adding. We're getting close to build out on the residential component of that. There's still a little bit of [ tattle ] left in that on the commercial side. So that will continue to build out. We'll add more connections.
So that gives you kind of an indication, we could be in the 1,000 to 1,200 range on that and then continuing to grow. And what we'll likely see, Bill, and I know we've talked about this, but we'll likely see -- we'll have multiple phases going on at Sky Ranch. And then as other properties that we don't necessarily own, but that we extend our utilities to continue to add and grow to the system, that really builds into sort of the capacity of our water portfolio. And so we want to have multiple projects going on at the same time that add capacity to our system in that. And so that's where you're going to see -- if you look at our capacity of our portfolio serving 60,000 connections, and we're serving 500 today, we'll have a bell curve on that well where that will continue to grow slower on the front end, then you get up to some very high numbers for a number of years, and then it'll trail off as we get to some of the build-out scenarios on our portfolio. But to get out 60,000 connections, that still probably 30 years out, but I think we still look very good in the short run.
Are there any other easy pickings on the acquisition front?
I was hoping somebody would ask me, what am I going to do with all our cash?
Yes. Well, that's the point, isn't it?
Yes, it is. It is, honestly. And I know we've talked about this in the past in terms of our philosophical view of how we manage our cash. And if I'm at $3.5 million a year in my overhead, and I've got $25 million, $30 million of cash, that's a little bit long on the cash side to be sitting on the balance sheet. It's a high quality problem, and I'm not going to make any money investing at T-bills. Right now, I've got to give money up than invest that in T-bills on the short stuff. So we're looking to be opportunistic here. We're looking for acquisitions that may have otherwise not been available to us or added pricing that might be a little bit more advantageous, much like when we acquired Sky Ranch. I'm looking for land interest that don't have water to them where we can pick that land interest up. I'm looking for water systems that are going to be stressed in this market condition and may need somebody to come in and help make some improvements to them -- that have the liquidity to make some improvements in them. So the acquisition costs are going to be a little bit more favorable for us. And opportunities where we can extend infrastructure to areas that give us more connections and more customers. So I know that's been my mantra that we've got our nets out there, but this is an opportunity where when you get this kind of stress into the system, that those usually present good opportunities. And so we'll take a look at those. We still want to be disciplined about our metrics and take a look at -- whether I get excited about it or not, I think my Board is very, very disciplined and very acclimated to throttling back some of my enthusiasm at times, but they're also looking for opportunities and -- to maybe risk on with some of that stuff and be opportunistic with this current condition. We'll see.
If there was ever a time to be aggressive about the whole thing, aren't we approaching that at the moment?
I tend to indicate -- I tend to agree with you on that. I think the proof of being the putting to see what happens and how this current market condition impacts businesses, property owners, entrepreneurs, the whole 9 yards are going to -- it's going to have a very significant trickle down effect. And you just got to know that the liquidity will get a premium today. And so us having a very healthy balance sheet, we have a very solid liquid balance sheet that we can pounce on deals and solve other people's problems. And some -- it's not necessarily a win, lose relationship because current market conditions are what they are. I would say that when we acquired Sky Ranch, we were in a very similar situation. And having the access that we had then and having sort of a longer time horizon to be able to make sure that we can get those assets and not impact the shareholder value and really use those assets to create more shareholder value by adding water to it and increasing the value that way and then adding infrastructure on the utility side where we acquired some utilities in the past as well, all of those are great opportunities for us.
Well, your record is superb, not only with Sky Ranch, but with the acreage you bought down on the Arkansas River. So I hope the Board isn't being throttle on your -- or constraint on your activity now. Now is the time when you should have somebody devoted to looking at these things. If not you, you have somebody else who is -- whose assignment is to go out and scout for these opportunities?
Well, Bill, you just gave me another wild softball there. So that gives me an opportunity to introduce Kevin McNeill who's -- we welcome back to the company. He was our Controller about a decade ago, but he's going to be our new CFO, and that's exactly his charge is to get out there and start combing the landscape and see what opportunities are going to be available to us and put some metrics to it and see if we can generate some action there. So that -- it's exactly a great time for Kevin to come back to us on that, a lot of activity, and there's going to be plenty of deals that we can comb through.
So while I think I still have a little bit of game, and I appreciate your kind words there, I might give you my wife's phone number so that you can give me a slug. But yes -- I mean we really -- we are taking it very seriously, and we are staffing up to be able to be aggressive on that.
Great. I'm glad to hear that because you'll get paid ultimately for recurring revenues.
You are very astute on that and never fail to point that out for me.
Well, pointing out the obvious is a skill I have.
Well, thanks for kicking in and stay healthy.
You, too. Great job.
Our next question comes from [ Bill Cunningham ].
I have actually a question on what's going on with the actual contracts being signed. My most recent article on Seeking Alpha talked about what Richmond American is reporting. It's great that they report in real time what's happening with contract signings. And I've been monitoring carefully recently because I expected to see potentially cancellations because that's what I've seen all along with their website is you'll see something reported as sold because the contract has been signed, and then it goes out because of assuming maybe the purchaser doesn't qualify or something else goes on. So there's a lot of changing there. So I was -- I've been looking at the site the last couple of weeks and expecting to see cancellations with everything going on in the market. And instead, there's been 0 cancellations, and there's actually been a number of new contracts signed in the past week. So I'm kind of curious as to what your general spin is, not just with Pure Cycle and Sky Ranch, but what you're seeing with the market overall and housing and how some of this may want to look at the real estate market in general the next few months or couple of years.
Great question, one that it's probably -- I can only give you anecdotal comments on. But if I referenced anything, and this will be kind of a first-hand experience. Kevin coming back, he moved back, he relocated back from Austin, Texas. And we typically don't like to welcome Texans in here, but at least they have the right voting pattern. But anyway, he come back and he really wanted to buy a house in Sky Ranch. And so if he was moving back, he went out and met with all 3 builders and said, "Hey, listen, I want to buy a house." And they said, "Great. We're 9 months out." He said, "But I need a house in March." Then they said, "Well, good luck. You can't get one." And not only did he find that experience here, but in kind of the surrounding area. And so one of the things that we know is that there is strong demand at Sky Ranch. There's strong demand in the I-70 corridor. And so you look at where we're at, we're in the right location, and I think we're in the right price point in that.
And so I firmly believe that we will continue to see that same pace of contracts. I know that their traffic is going to be down just because everybody is staying at home. But I know a bunch of people are sitting around the kitchen table talking about, you know what, this house is too small. The kids are home, and everybody is sitting around. They're climbing the walls, going, I want something else. And so I think you're going to find some pent-up demand, and some people are going to -- I think our Governor extended it to another couple of weeks. But even outside that, they still have showings. They're still out there on site. They still have showings. They still have people that have a need, and I really believe you're going to see a rush of people coming out, putting the stuff under contract. And then everybody is going to be beat me up saying, "Why didn't you get that second project online sooner?" So I think it's going to be a high-quality problem for us. We want to be very reacting to it. We want to be able to invest some of that liquidity position we have into some acquisition opportunities as well as be able to invest into some of our next phase lots.
I try and time those contracts, so we play on the house's money, and then we take our equity in the back end. But I think that structure will still serve us well and give us some strong rope to go out there and lasso some of these deals.
It was truly surprising to see no cancellations and new contracts being signed in the last few weeks.
Totally separate question. I also noticed you've still got some revenue coming in from your oil and gas activities. And although the whole fracking industry, it's an unprofitable industry at this point, every dollar of revenue basically you get in is just income. You're not dealing with costs against it. So although revenue was down, you're generating a certain amount of income from it. It's not -- it's never going to generate a loss for you, and I think that's a rather important concept [indiscernible]
That's right. It's a very important distinction. And there's -- it's all a variable cost to us, right? So I don't have a lot of fixed costs that are outside that. So I can dial that up. I can dial that down. And you're right, if I'm not getting any revenue in, I'm not incurring the cost attributable to that. So that is a very attractive segment for us.
Mr. Harding, it looks like we have no further questions at this time. Would you like to make any closing remarks?
I would. Thanks. So again, I want to thank all of you for your continued loyalty and your continued support. We're very proud of being in this position, and really, it's a -- it's really a discipline of you guys having patience, the company having patience, the Board sticking to its metrics, management sticking to their metrics and being able to rightsize the company and grow the company and acquire valuable assets. We will continue to do that. We're very thankful of having our liquidity and our highly appreciating assets in times like these, and we will continue to try and make good decisions on your behalf. And what we'll be -- to foreshadow anything coming up assuming that we return to a bit more normal, I'd like to have another Investor Day for you all to come out again over the summer when you can see a ton of things going on, much more activity on the site. So as we get a little bit closer into that, maybe over in the July time frame, I'll send out a little save the date, and we can welcome you all that have been following the company if you haven't had a chance to come out, and those of you who are new to the company, have a chance to kick the tires because there's nothing quite like seeing it and getting your arms around it for a real tangible view of what we do. So thank you.
And with that, I'll sign off. And I look forward -- if anybody who had a question that couldn't get through, that had a technical challenge, don't hesitate to give me a holler. Thanks.
Thank you. At this time, this concludes today's teleconference. You may now disconnect your lines. Thank you for your participation.
Welcome to the RPM International Conference Call for the Fiscal 2020 Third Quarter. Today's call is being recorded. This call is also being webcast and can be accessed live or replayed on the RPM website at www.rpminc.com. Comments made on this call may include forward-looking statements. Based on current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, which could cause actual results to be materially different. For more information on these risks and uncertainties, please review RPM's reports filed with the SEC.
During this conference call, references may be made to non-GAAP financial measures. To assist you in understanding these non-GAAP terms, RPM has posted reconciliations to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures on the RPM website. Following today's presentation, there will be a question-and- answer session. [Operator Instructions]
Please note that only financial analysts will be permitted to ask questions. At this time, I would like to turn the call over to RPM's Chairman and CEO, Mr. Frank Sullivan, for opening remarks.
Thank you, Vanessa. Good morning, and welcome to the RPM International Inc. investor call for our fiscal 2020 third quarter ended February 29, 2020. On the call with me today are Rusty Gordon, RPM's Vice President and Chief Financial Officer; and Matt Ratajczak, our Vice President of Global Tax and Treasury, who is also heading our Investor Relations function.
I'll start the call by discussing how we are managing our business through the COVID-19 pandemic. Then I'll provide an update on our 2020 MAP to Growth operating improvement program. After that, I'll turn the call over to Matt, who'll walk through our third quarter results in detail, and he'll be followed by Rusty, who will discuss the outlook for the fourth quarter and year-end.
First, we know that all of you are dealing with disruptions in your professional and personal lives resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, especially our analysts and investors from the New York City area. I'd like to thank you for being on our call today and for your continuing interest in RPM and wish you and your families good health during this challenging time.
At RPM, our priorities have been to protect the health and well-being of our associates and their family members, to support our local communities to control the spread of the virus and to serve our customers by maintaining the continuity and success of our business operations.
Our 15,000 associates around the world have really embraced these priorities, and I'd like to commend them for the incredible work that they've done to continue each and every day. When it comes to protecting their own health and that of their families, we've established many protocols across our operations.
We are taking precautions in our facilities to keep our people safe by aggressively cleaning and disinfecting high-touch areas, practicing social distancing and good hygiene and have been screening for COVID-19 symptoms prior to entry in all of our facilities for more than 3 weeks. As of April 7, we have been informed by 14 of our 15,000 employees that they have had at various times confirmed cases of coronavirus. In these cases, we enacted our protocols to shut down the affected location, have them thoroughly cleaned and disinfected, quarantine all appropriate -- affected people and then reopened the facilities following an appropriate shutdown period.
In terms of our communities, we are working from home, monitoring the hygiene and health of our manufacturing and distribution associates and reporting any infection or disruptions. We're also donating time and materials to help stem the spread of the virus. In one case, our Woodfinishes Group supplied thousands of plastic bottles to a local distillery that has been converting product to hand sanitizer and is providing it to free in the community, especially to health care first responders.
In another case, our Rust-Oleum operations sourced its Concrobium fogger product and donated it to first responders so that their air ambulance helicopters could be disinfected and returned to service quickly. These are just a few examples of how our operations are responding to local needs.
As one of the world's largest suppliers of specialty coatings and building materials, RPM is in a strong position to weather the toll that the COVID-19 pandemic is having on the global economy. We are taking action to adjust our business activities during this period of uncertainty and are well positioned with strong cash flow, a solid capital structure and $1.1 billion in liquidity. Many of our products are used for construction, maintenance and repair projects, which are deemed essential in many cases and are relatively recession-resistant. RPM companies around the world with a few exceptions have been able to continue to operate their plants and distribution centers. In fact, today, nearly all of our North American plants are operational with a few exceptions, while a number of our international plants have been closed due to government mandates.
A large number of our North American customers such those in -- such as those in construction, infrastructure and DIY, home and hardware retail are also considered essential and currently remain open for business. With people spending more time in their homes, there is potential for increased DIY activity projects. Raw material cost inflation seems to be moderating in a number of our key product categories, our global supply chain remains strong and our distribution and operations associates continue to work diligently to meet customer demand.
We continue to be proactive in taking actions around the globe in our operations as the situation evolves. Now I'd like to discuss our MAP to Growth restructuring program. It has steadily been gaining momentum each quarter. This quarter is no different, as demonstrated by our excellent bottom line results, strong organic growth, strong earnings leverage and record levels of cash generation. Restructuring activities include enacting operational improvements at our production facilities, consolidating manufacturing plants, delayering management and rationalizing product lines.
During the third quarter and early in the fourth quarter, we announced the closure of 2 additional plants, which brings our total to 20 out of the 31 plants that were originally targeted for closure at the beginning of the MAP to Growth program. Versus last year, on a consolidated basis, we realized incremental MAP to Growth savings in the third quarter totaling $21 million, of which $5 million came from manufacturing, $12 million from procurement and $4 million from SG&A.
Looking ahead, as the COVID-19 pandemic slows economic and business activity, it is also impacting our MAP to Growth program. While there are some initiatives that can be carried out virtually, many, particularly those dealing with additional manufacturing improvements and the completion of our ERP to facilities have required us to temporarily halt some of our operating improvement activities. As such, we will be extending out the time line from our original MAP to Growth goals in terms of their ultimate achievement.
At this point, there is too much uncertainty to set a new date for reaching our objectives. As our markets stabilize and we gain more clarity into the business conditions, we will communicate our new MAP to Growth time line. But as you can see, once again, in our third quarter results, our people are executing on our MAP to Growth initiatives very effectively.
I'll now turn the call over to Matt Ratajczak for a detailed review of our results for the third quarter.
Thanks, Frank, and good morning, everyone. Note that my comments will be on an as-adjusted basis. During the third quarter, we generated consolidated net sales of $1.17 billion, an increase of 2.9% compared to the $1.14 billion reported during the same quarter of fiscal 2019. Organic sales growth was 3% or $34 million. Acquisitions contributed 0.7% of sales or $9 million, while foreign exchange was a headwind that reduced sales by 0.8% or $9.6 million. This was solid top line growth during the third quarter, which typically generates our most modest results each year because it falls during the winter months when painting and construction activity is slow.
Adjusted diluted earnings per share were $0.23, an increase of 76.9% compared to the $0.13 in the year ago quarter. Our consolidated adjusted earnings before interest and taxes, EBIT, were up 30.4% to $60.5 million compared to $46.4 million reported in the fiscal 2019 third quarter. These excellent bottom line results were largely due to initiatives under our MAP to Growth restructuring program. Our earnings also benefited from pricing and moderating raw material costs.
Turning now to our segments. Sales in our Construction Products Group were strong and increased 4.7% to $372.1 million. Growth was primarily organic at 5.1% or $18.5 million. Acquisitions contributed 1% or $3.4 million. Foreign currency translation reduced sales by 1.4% or $5.1 million. Sales growth was driven by market share gains and the introduction of innovative new products with the fastest growth being generated in our roofing, below-grade waterproofing and concrete admixtures businesses.
Adjusted EBIT in the Construction Products segment increased $6 million from an adjusted EBIT loss of $0.3 million during last year's third quarter. This improvement was largely attributed to pricing, moderating raw material costs, MAP to Growth savings and a favorable leverage impact of higher sales volume.
Sales in our Performance Coatings Group were $255.7 million, up 1% from the $253.2 million we reported during last year's third quarter. Organic growth was 1.6% or $3.9 million. Sales growth in this segment was mixed as highway and bridge maintenance businesses were slowed by government budget constraints, particularly in the U.K. However, its protective in marine coatings business, unit increased market share and its Continental European operations grew sharply, driven by a new global management structure. Acquisitions added 0.2% to sales or $0.5 million, while foreign exchange was a headwind of 0.8% or $1.9 million. Segment adjusted EBIT increased 33.2% to $24.2 million from $18.2 million during last year's third quarter. A focus on higher-margin products and service offerings as well as MAP to Growth business rationalization initiatives drove a significant adjusted EBIT margin improvement of 230 basis points in the segment.
In the Consumer Group, sales were robust, increasing 5.4% to $398.7 million. Organic sales increased 6% or $22.6 million, driven by market share gains and unseasonably warm winter weather in North America that enabled consumers to complete more DIY home improvement projects. The fastest growth was achieved in our caulks, sealants, and patch and repair product lines. There was no impact from acquisitions during the quarter. Foreign currency translation reduced sales by 0.6% or $2.2 million. Adjusted EBIT in the Consumer Group was $32.1 million, an increase of 19.2% over the prior year. This bottom line performance was driven by savings from our MAP to Growth operating improvement plan and were partially offset by inflation in certain raw materials and channel mix.
On the top line, the Specialty Products Group's wood coatings business successfully outperformed its peers in a challenging market. However, sales of the segment's water damage restoration products faced a difficult comparison to the prior year when demand was exceptionally high due to significant weather events in North America. Sales were also down in our OEM fluorescent pigments, nail polish and edible coatings businesses. Segment sales were $147.5 million. Organic sales decreased 7.1% and foreign currency translation reduced sales by 0.3%.
The segment benefited 3.3% or $5.1 million from acquisitions. Adjusted EBIT was $17.5 million during the quarter, which was lower than the $20.2 million of adjusted EBIT reported in the same period last year. Savings from our operating improvement program helped to mitigate the impact declining sales volume had on earnings. In addition, we have new management in place and are implementing cost- cutting measures and new processes to reignite growth.
Now I'll provide some comments on our cash flow and liquidity. For the first 9 months of fiscal 2020, cash from operations grew by 162% to $381.2 million compared to $145.5 million a year ago. This increase of $235.7 million was due to improved working capital management and operating improvement initiatives. Free cash flow improved to a source of cash of $137 million during the first 9 months of fiscal 2020 as compared to a use of cash of $74.5 million during the first 9 months of fiscal 2019. This $211.5 million increase is a result of higher earnings, coupled with overall improved working capital metrics.
Next, a few comments on our liquidity profile. The maturities of our long-term debt portfolio are nicely staggered with the next scheduled maturity out in November 2022, and we have multiple options for access to short-term liquidity under both our revolving credit and accounts receivables facilities. Further, in the month of February, we improved our financial flexibility and increased our liquidity by $400 million by securing 2 3-year term loans. We borrowed $400 million immediately after closing and swaps to a euro fixed interest rate of approximately 0.6%. The proceeds were used to pay down the balance on our revolving credit facility. Finally, as Frank stated, at February 29, 2020, our total liquidity, including cash and committed revolving credit facilities was $1.1 billion.
I'll now turn the call over to Rusty for details on our share repurchase program and the outlook for the remainder of fiscal 2020.
Thanks, Matt. As part of our MAP to Growth program, we established the goal of repurchasing $1 billion of our stock. In March, subsequent to the end of the third quarter, we exceeded the halfway point of that goal when we repurchased approximately $25 million of our common shares. This is in addition to the $300 million we repurchased during fiscal 2019 and the first 3 quarters of fiscal 2020, coupled with a $200 million cash redemption of our convertible notes in November 2018. While we were making good progress on this goal, given recent macroeconomic uncertainty resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, we have suspended our share buyback program.
Looking ahead, the fourth quarter is seasonally our strongest and was off to a good start in March. Consolidated sales for the month increased 5% over the prior year led by the Specialty segment, which was up 9%, Consumer was up 7%, Construction Products Group sales increased 7%, and Performance Coatings Group declined 3%. However, like most companies, we expect our financial results to be impacted by the disruption and uncertainty COVID-19 is having on the global economy.
Today, nearly all of our plants are open in North America, where we generate 74% of our sales. Some of our international plants have been shut down due to government mandates around the world. These facilities generate approximately 6% of RPM sales. While these shutdowns are of various durations, ranging from days to weeks, they are likely to impact our fourth quarter sales in April and May.
In our Construction Products Group, demand for our innovative products and solutions has been robust, and the segment has very strong momentum behind it. Construction is on the U.S. Department of Homeland Security's Essential Critical Infrastructure Workforce advisory list. The segment has a large number of hospital and health care system clients that will continue to require its offerings.
During a good sales month in March, Tremco was able to support schools during this unexpected shutdown by moving up planned roofing and other facility restoration work.
At our Performance Coatings Group, results will be mixed. We anticipate seeing a boost in sales for our hygienic seamless flooring systems. However, the portion of our corrosion control and fireproofing coatings that are tied directly or indirectly to oil and gas markets, a little more than $200 million in sales annually, may be at risk should there be a prolonged drop in pricing in those markets. So we are closely monitoring investment in this area.
POS takeaway at our Consumer Group has been strong with unit growth in the mid- to high single digits, particularly for our professional and consumer cleaning and disinfectant brands, some of which are effective against the coronavirus. The majority of the segment sales are in North America where DIY home and hardware retailers remain open for business. As consumers shelter in place, they are spending more time in their homes and have more time and interest in home repair, maintenance, improving and cleaning projects, which should continue to benefit the segment.
In our Specialty Products Group, the outlook is mixed. Some of our companies, such as our marine coatings business will be slowed by the closures of their distributor and retail networks. On the other hand, Legend Brands, which manufactures cleaning products and equipment is seeing spiking demand as its restoration contractor base is shifting to disinfecting services and this trend should continue over the coming month.
According to current government projections, it appears that the COVID-19 crisis may reach its peak in April or May. This is obviously a fluid situation, and the information available to us is rapidly changing. As we sit here today, we anticipate that our consolidated fourth quarter revenue will be down 10% to 15% year-over-year. This assumes our strong March results are counterbalanced by sales drops in April and May of 15% to 20%.
With that being said, given the uncertainties around this crisis, we are withdrawing our prior earnings guidance for the fourth quarter and full year of fiscal 2020.
We will continue to assess the situation and the short and long-term impacts of COVID-19. We are taking aggressive actions to manage cash flow by reducing working capital, capital expenditures and discretionary spending. The MAP to Growth program timing has been fortunate for us in this regard since we have improved margins and are starting to see the benefits of our working capital reduction program, resulting in improved cash flow this year.
Additionally, as Frank and Matt mentioned, we have significant liquidity and a strong balance sheet, which we anticipate will keep us in a solid financial position. This concludes our formal comments. We will now be pleased to take your questions.
[Operator Instructions] And we have our first question from John McNulty with BMO Capital.
So I guess the first one would just be on the revenue outlook. So the commentary around April and May, looking down 15% to 20%. Look, it's a tough market to try to forecast now. But like looking at some of Rusty's commentary on each of the divisions, it doesn't sound like it's kind of trending quite as bad as maybe that guidance would necessarily indicate. So I guess, where are the puts and takes there? And I guess when you think about the 4 segments, where you see kind of the biggest pressures when you're looking at that 15% to 20% down versus maybe where there may be some bright spots? How should we be thinking about that?
Sure. So first of all, it doesn't behoove anybody to do forecasting with an optimistic outlook. And so I think our assumptions of April and May being down 15% to 20% had been done appropriately with a negative conservative cast. But it's literally hard to tell from day-to-day. We will have spikes in some of our Construction Products businesses over a couple day period because of order flow that looks really good, and then you'll see some slowdowns. The things that are pretty certain will be the negative impact of multi-week shutdowns. Most of this is outside of the United States, probably a little less than half of our manufacturing facilities in Europe are closed.
And I won't get into all the details, but it's an interesting mix. We had a plant in Norway closed that's now reopened. Interestingly, our primary plant in Italy is now reopened. But we have plants in the U.K. and various parts of the continent that are closed by government mandate for a period of weeks. We are also closed in our 2 major plants in India and almost every manufacturing facility in Latin and South America and in South Africa. There's a few other locations, but they're so small as to be inconsequential.
As Rusty said, when you add that all up on an annualized basis, it's about 6% of our revenue. So it's not big. And the impact of reopening will determine whether we're at the bottom end of that range and the top end of that range. I think the good news for us is we're not yet seeing the underlying demand disruption that exists in some industries. Obviously, the hospitality industry has challenges. But even the auto assembly industry has got some challenges now that -- around the demand side that will be which is oil and gas and across our Performance Coatings Group, that's a little more than $200 million of annualized revenue. And so our expectation is in the coming quarters and year, that's an area that will be under pressure. Hopefully, that's responsive to your question.
Yes. No, that's definitely helpful. And then I guess maybe shifting gears a little bit to the MAP to Growth cost-cutting programs. I guess, can you give us some clarity? Look, you had Wave 1 that was -- you were going to get the full year benefit this year kind of coming in. Wave 2, you were going to get a decent chunk, and then there was going to be Wave 3 for next year as it would roll. And I guess can you give us an update as to where you are in those buckets? And what things are kind of already in the bag? And what percent may be actually kind of pushed off at this point? Is there a way to think about that?
Sure. And so I can tell you, from my perspective, and I don't mean this to be tried. Obviously, this coronavirus pandemic is horribly impactful to everybody. But as it relates to MAP to Growth, there's a plus and a minus. The minus is, as you can see in this quarter and subsequent quarters before this, the things that we have planned, the things that we are executing are working. We had talked about working capital improvements and then quickly realized that they would come later in the cycle. You're seeing those now. And so it's a little bit disappointing that a MAP to Growth program that in its execution and positive impact is being disrupted.
On the other hand, there are a number of instances where I think the timing of certain things were lucky, and this is one of those. Our cash conversion cycle is stronger than it's ever been. And we have effected close to 2/3 of what we wanted to do in MAP to Growth across every -- certainly across manufacturing and the procurement process by centralizing our purchasing globally. Probably less than 2/3 in the G&A area because the last bigger piece of that will come once the ERP implementations are completed. So the areas that are most disrupted is getting the continuous improvement disciplines into our medium and smaller plants. And also completing the ERP implementations that we had set to complete over the next 12 to 15 months. And those will be put off because they require, in some instances, a physical presence. But the gains that we have made have been solidified and will continue to benefit us. And it's been a really good program that was accelerating.
Rusty provided details of March. March is a repeat of what we've been showing quarter after quarter. But obviously, that will be -- it's our anticipation that that will be meaningfully disrupted in April and May.
The last comment that I will make is, if you believe what you read and you believe what you see on the ground, it does appear as if April and May will be the most negatively impacted period, 60-day period, as it relates to government-mandated shutdown and business disruptions. And it will be interesting to see as we get into the summer months, both globally and then in the United States, state by state, how the reopening of the economy happens, both in terms of sectors and speed.
We have our next question from Frank Mitsch with Fermium Research.
Frank, I appreciate the color on expected declines in April and May, and obviously, your year was off to a really good start. What is underpinning -- what are your assumptions in terms of housing starts and commercial construction activity in April and May that is underpinning that 15% to 20% sales decline?
So I can't answer that question. We haven't gone from a macro perspective into that. What we have done is talk to each of our businesses. We've looked at the affected plants globally. We have had some affected plants in the United States, not surprisingly they've principally been manufacturing facilities in the New Jersey, North Jersey area of kind of Metro New York, and we've had shutdowns, we've quarantined people, we've closed the plant, we've disinfected it, cleaned it and brought people back. So we've been through that cycle. And it's not a good cycle to go through. But when you've done it once or twice, you begin to develop a rhythm of understanding the quarantine time, the cleaning process and getting people back to work. But we really have done it bottom-up, company-by-company and an assessment of their sales force. And so in the consumer DIY areas, there's not only been more people at home, but at least temporarily, there seems to be a shift from contractor, do it for me to DIY and that will benefit our consumer DIY businesses, for instance.
The only element of our consumer DIY business that's impacted by residential new construction would be the caulks and sealants segment of our DAP business. We haven't done an analysis of what that means, but that's the area in Consumer that would be impacted.
The Construction Products Group continues to see spotty cycles of big order flow in roofing projects and then stops. In our Performance Coatings Group, we're building a solid with good customer bases in tech, in food and beverage and in areas that will, I think, perform well through this, but some of that's being put off. And so I'm not answering your question specifically other than to say that we have done this bottom- up business unit by business unit and trying to understand the order flow and the impact. And as I said earlier, I think the only big market that we're very concerned about as a real challenge coming is oil and gas.
Understood. I understand the difficulties there. Let me shift in, you did mention that you are seeing a market share gain in the Consumer business. I was wondering if you could expand upon that. And then speaking of Consumers, I'm wondering if you're getting any kind of instantaneous data or what have you in terms of the social distancing impact on the home centers and hardware stores? And is that having -- even though DIY should be a very positive trend. I mean I know that the time to get what you want at a Home Depot has gone exponentially higher. Are you seeing any negative impact there in terms of your business?
I'm sure the answer to that is yes. We wouldn't talk about individual customers, but some customers have instituted more rigorous regimens of how many people they'll let into their stores. Interestingly enough, our online orders are through the roof. And so in certain product categories where we might get 40 or 50 online orders a week. It could be hundreds or 1,000. And so we're fulfilling that, and that is through our major retailers to a lesser extent. We actually do more online business through a number of our major retail customers than we do through Amazon, but our Amazon business is growing.
And then in Europe, as part of our consumer DIY business, which has been more negatively impacted, particularly in the U.K. than in the U.S. because of some temporary business shutdowns, we have a business called VerdeCoat, which is kind of an MRO. It was a catalog, now it's an MRO online catalog business. And their business, literally over the last month, is up almost 100%. It's a smaller piece of that, but you're seeing a shift to online as well. All in all, through March, we had a high single digit, low double- digit POS across the entirety of our Consumer segment customer base.
And we have our next question from Rosemarie Morbelli with G.Research.
I was just wondering, Frank, whether you could touch on the lower CapEx, which -- what do you think the amount will be by year-end? And which are the projects that you are eliminating?
So our goal this year was to spend about $180 million in CapEx. I think when we finished the year, we'll be closer to $150 million. Notably, with a really strong cash flow through 9 months, that included a year- over-year higher level of CapEx of about $20 million. So that gives you a sense of the strong cash flow that we're generating.
For next year, our preliminary budgeting was about $150 million in CapEx. And at this point in time, I think we can pare that back by $25 million or $30 million without negatively interrupting our MAP to Growth program or the areas that we're growing. And if need be, depending on circumstances, we could pare that back further. But that's our current plan.
Okay. And when you are talking about most of your facilities operating in the U.S. or in North America altogether, what is the capacity utilization? Yes, they are open, but how much business is coming out of there?
It's very hard to say, Rosemarie, as I think we highlighted either in Rusty's comments or in our press release, it's circumstantial to each business. So if you're in the small project paint, patch and repair, particularly our cleaner categories, there's -- and I don't have them exactly. One of them is Krud Kutter Industrial, another is a mean, green antibacterial product. We have 3 cleaning products through Rust- Oleum that are certified as approved for cleaning surfaces relative to COVID-19. Those are through the roof. And the constraints there is raw materials, but we're continuing to do that.
The flip side is our marine coatings business, which is a smaller business as part of our Specialty Products Group. In total, that's maybe a $25 million in revenue business. And we normally wouldn't talk about SPU sizes, but to put that in perspective. And many of their large marine product retailers and/or shipyards that do repair, maintenance and recoating for yachts and boats are closed. And so that's a business where revenues might at this point be impacted as much as 50%. But that's a temporary period and whether that lasts for another few weeks or another few months, time will tell.
And if I may sneak another one in. With Q4 revenues down 15%, what could be the impact on your bottom line? And that is linked to the marine business being down 50%. And I think, if I am not wrong, that it has a very high margin.
Sure. We don't -- as Rusty said, we're suspending guidance. And at this point, we're looking at expense reductions, expense deferrals, cutbacks in capital spending, taking advantage of a few of the things that are in the CARES Act that apply to larger businesses. One example is a deferral of FICA taxes. We're looking at things like that to really drive cash flow generation. And that's very much our focus.
I think the MAP to Growth program will allow us to generate better bottom line income than we otherwise would have in the face of revenue declines. But beyond that, we're not in a position really to talk about earnings or earnings per share or any projections around that for the quarter.
And we have our next question from Steve Byrne with Bank of America.
Frank, what's the time lag and frequency by which you receive sales data from the big box home centers on your Consumer products? And let me just see how you answer that one first.
Sure. I'm pretty certain that in most categories, our Consumer businesses get that information on a weekly basis.
And can you tell whether or not the home centers are placing orders for inventory restocking that's commensurate with that? Or do you sense any change in stock levels as they look forward into these next couple of months?
It literally is week by week. So your question is spot on in terms of the things that we're paying to -- paying attention to. There'll be some interesting new dynamics for all of us relative to learning how to work from home. And I say that because we have a senior leader meeting every other day at the end of the day. And we talk about code infections, if there are any, fortunately, as our statistics show, they're not many and they've been sporadic. And they've actually mostly been in the New Jersey area for us. And we talk about impacting our operations, but we also talk about every other day what's going on, order flow impact. So we have some good insight into that. It's very circumstantial.
Some of our retail customers are showing a solid POS in the early part of April or what we would forecast for the early part of April here. Some of them are showing levels that are below where we were in March, and we think that has more to do with deliberate decisions to limit the traffic flow into their stores than it does with actually demand. And then lastly, as I indicated earlier, it's very spotty. We are selling all the cleaning and disinfecting products that we can make. That's true at our Legend Brands business as well. And so that's an area that maybe by July, we'll have a better sense of what we can say in some detail about the different DIY product categories and what's really moving the needle.
And on that 6% organic growth that you posted in the fiscal third quarter in the Consumer segment, is that mostly volume? And can you comment on the outlook for price given moderating raws?
Sure. It's mostly volume. As you saw, given the strong volume there and in our Consumer -- I'm sorry, in our Construction Products Group and Performance Coatings Group, the leverage to the bottom line has been a little less in our Consumer business in part because we've been facing some unique raw material challenges there. Some of which are now abating. The biggest one was packaging in certain areas. And so it's -- in all 3 of those segments, Construction products and Consumer products, the unit volume growth has been really solid.
In the Performance Coatings Group, the actual unit volume growth through 9 months has been better than the numbers show because they've been very deliberate in pairing back lower-margin product categories and in closing some lower-margin or breakeven international businesses.
So as we indicated, we've shed close to $60 million or $70 million on an annualized basis deliberately in this reorganization. And that's been disproportionately in our Performance Coatings Group and our Construction Products Group, not in Consumer. Although, there is some coming in Consumer with some overseas businesses that don't meet our margin criteria. And so it's been very solid organic growth.
We have our next question from Ghansham Panjabi with Baird.
Frank, you made some comments about, obviously, employee mobility impacting some of your MAP to Growth initiatives. Clearly, your customer is going to be impacted by the same dynamic and presumably will be even as the economy starts to gradually open up. I'm just curious from a segment standpoint, how should we think about this dynamic as it relates to customer qualification of your products for future capital projects, et cetera? How are you sort of adapting towards this new normal, if you want to call it that?
Sure. And so in our Construction Products business, I think we're fortunate both in every segment of RPM because of the benefits of MAP to Growth. But if you think about where we've been strong, so while our -- in general, and to your question, I do think that there will be a reduction for a period of time in industrial capital spending. And certainly, outside of oil and gas, which is part of that, a little more than $200 million, but there's probably $0.5 billion of our revenues that are driven by industrial capital spending or major projects. But again, it's circumstantial. Our Stonhard business has been a leading provider globally, including the application portion of it of polymer flooring with a real strong presence in food, beverage, hospitals, fab plants, and so areas of the economy that we think are going to do pretty well.
The interesting anecdote was our Stonhard business that was cast by a major contractor to put together the hygienic flooring in the hospital -- temporary hospital facilities that were going to be set up in Central Park in New York. And we got that order. It was under strict requirements relative to timing. We've got the material and the applicators there. And then good news relatively quickly that order got cut in half because it seems as if the anticipated need of the number of bed spaces for this temporary hospital spot in New York City is not going to be needed. I hope that's true. But that gives you a sense of why we think over time that segment will do well.
Our Tremco Roofing business has been the leader in North America in these long-term, high-performing restoration roofing projects. And what they've been very good at is being able to dry out an old roof as opposed to tear it off and then apply a roof restoration coating and extend the life of a 30- or 40-year-old roof for another 10 to 20 years. That's at 1/3 of the cost of ripping off and replacing with new materials a old roof. Surely, we will be seeing enhanced competition there, but we're the leader there. And I say that because I think that the negative impact in that sector for us will be more on the rip off and OEM replacement.
We don't play in that space. 95% of our Tremco Roofing business has been reroofing. And so without filibustering the call here, we've looked at oil and gas, that will be a problem. We've looked at $0.5 billion driven by industrial capital spending because clearly, we're going to be cutting ours and others will do the same. And it's circumstantial. But in a lot of cases, I think we're in a pretty good position.
Okay. That's super helpful. And Frank, I know you don't want to give guidance, completely understandable. But as you kind of think back to the financial crisis, what was the initial decremental costs. Obviously, you're in a position of strength with MAP to Growth and the momentum there. So just curious as to what transpired back then?
And then second, as you kind of think about disruption risk yourselves, given the fluid operating environment, how should we think about working capital? Will that be -- will you build up a little bit more inventory as part of your safety stock for supplying your customers? Or do you still expect working capital to be a benefit this year to the extent that it has been?
Sure. So when you go back to '08 and '09, our fiscal year could not have modeled the Great Recession any better. We start our '09 fiscal year in June of '08, and we finish our '09 fiscal year on May 31 of '09. So we pretty much modeled the beginning of the financial crisis and then when people started to feel okay. In that period of time, our sales were down 7%, and our adjusted net income was off a little more than 35%. We had our best cash flow year ever.
In fiscal 2010, sales on a consolidated basis recovered by about 1% and earnings -- net income and EPS was up 25% on adjusted basis. And so we had a strong recovery and that was not inconsistent with kind of the the recovery that many people had.
I think our cash conversion cycle is better now, thanks to the timing of MAP to Growth. I do think while we will build up some safety stock in a few areas, I do think through a combination of MAP to Growth and in some cases, reduce volume, you will see working capital as a contributor to cash generation in the coming quarters.
As I've commented, our -- we look bottom-up the entrepreneurial nature of RPM in terms of how we serve our customers is still alive and well and will suit us well in terms of flexibility. And this is a big picture perspective. But contrary to what some people expect, I do not see a V for global economies here. I see a U and I think that U will be shorter for some and longer for others depending on -- and all of you know this better than we do on the impact of this pandemic, which has been devastating to certain industries and hospitality, for instance, and have been helpful to some unique businesses relative to cleaning products. But for us, I see a improved performance as we get into our new fiscal year relative to our conservatively negative expectations for Q4.
But I think for everybody, we're looking at a U recovery, not a V.
And we have our next question from Silke Kueck with JPMorgan.
I was wondering if I could do like a similar exercise like look at -- like what happened in '09. And what sort of like happen is that in the February and May quarters, the organic growth was sort of like down 10% or 15%, which is why your guidance make -- really makes sense. And if you look at it by the vision though, like one of the things that happened is that both of the industrial business, which is now your construction, your Performance Coatings business, they were down maybe in terms of volumes, like 12% in the February quarter and then 19% in the May quarter. But the consumer business had similar results. The consumer business in February was down 14% in volumes and maybe 19% in the May quarter. And in part, it had to do that, there was a financial crisis and people couldn't spend money. And like somehow it feels like something similar is going on now, where a lot of people will be unemployed and like a 1/3 of the people didn't pay a rent for April. And so one of the questions is that when we model down this like 10% to 15%, should that really be stuck into all the segments rather than saying, well, consumer is down 5% and everything else is down 20%.
Sure. I am. I think this is different from the financial crisis. And so I don't have in front of me the details by segment. We had 3 segments back then. And so I can't be specific to that. But I can tell you in the third quarter, our Consumer segment tanked, and we literally anecdotally were talking about shooting canons down the aisle of our big customers, including home centers like Walmart and not hitting anybody. And so for a very short period of time during the financial crisis, consumers stopped buying everything. And I think the fear there was that at some point, they're going to go to their ATM and nothing is going to come out. That eased up very quickly. I think what we're seeing now is very different. We're seeing pretty steady on a segment basis, but spiky based on different product categories, business activity. But it does speak, Silke to the comment I made earlier, we do not anticipate a V recovery for us and for anybody. I do think that there will be -- even as economies recover, even as these mandated government restrictions are eased, I do think that there will be a period of time in which economic activity from where we were a year ago will be somewhat subdued.
Okay. So you are more of a believer that if you looked at the -- and then I don't mean to criticize, just trying to understand. So like your view is that there's probably a lot more -- from your point of view, there would be like a lot more headwind on the Construction Performance group businesses in terms of negative volumes in the May quarter and a lot less on the Consumer side?
No, I think in the May quarter, it is our expectation that there will be less negative impacts in our Consumer segment than in our other segments. That is correct. The one that's the spikiest for us right now is Construction Products Group because we're seeing days of year-over-year record order flow and then days of crickets.
And so it's very spiky. So it's hard to know.
Okay. That's helpful. And then just a question of clarification on the MAP to Growth product -- program. If you realize $21 million in savings year-over-year in the third quarter, does one annualize and say the run rate savings are like $85 million or $84 million for the year. Is that the way to look at it?
Yes. The savings we're talking to are the incremental year-over-year savings of $21 million. And those change each quarter. Our cumulative savings we used to report in the past, but we found it would be more helpful for analysts to discuss the quarter and the increment.
Yes. And so back to our original goal of $290 million in savings. In terms of the manufacturing piece, the procurement piece and the G&A piece, we are on track for the G&A piece. But that slowed down. We are ahead of both of the manufacturing and procurement piece relative to our original $200 million -- $290 million goals. There have been some offsets to that. FX has hurt us in ways we didn't anticipate, slower growth has hurt us. But we're through 20 plant closures out of a planned 31. We're through $60 million to $70 million of either business or product line rationalizations, the continuous improvement activity in our plants by the time we're done this -- with this will exceed our original goals meaningfully. So if you'll recall, we had $75 million of targeted MAP to Growth goals in the manufacturing area, split roughly between the impact of footprint consolidation and continuous improvement. We'll achieve the half from footprint consolidation.
And we will have tens of millions of dollars of more out of the continuous improvement efforts by the time we're done, and that will be incrementally continuing. So all of those had been going quite well for us, and they're pretty well embedded. The momentum, if -- as you guys had pointed out, year 1 in a 3-year restructuring program was the easiest with the lowest hanging fruit. Well, year 2 has gone exceedingly well, and our momentum was continuing to build, my biggest disappointment, and again, it's a trite statement in light of what's happening in the world, is that momentum now has been a little bit disrupted.
And we have our next question from Vincent Andrews with Morgan Stanley.
I just want to ask in the fourth quarter sales guidance, what's the impact you have in there for foreign exchange and for M&A, just so that we can kind of get to the true organic range that you're looking for?
Yes, that's a great question. And we are trying to take into account FX. And again, I mentioned that we talk to the senior leadership team every other day. And the FX swings in developing country currencies are nuts. So in Latin America, you're seeing 30%, 40%-plus negative impacts. I would remind folks that that's about $300 million of revenues in total?
Yes.
Yes. And so it's not huge but -- and then you can see the strength of the dollar versus the euro and the Canadian dollar and the pound, which are other bigger currencies. So we are anticipating that in this guidance for the fourth quarter. The acquisition activity will be very modest, as you saw in the third quarter. So -- but we don't anticipate. In some prior quarters, acquisition activity at 1% or 2%, has acquisition positive impact.
So if we think like 3% to 5% for FX, is that in the ballpark, keeping in mind that it's a moving target?
Yes. That would be our best guess right now. I think that's good math, but who knows.
Okay. And then I just want to clarify one other thing. You called out the $200 million of oil and gas exposed revenue and the $500 million tied to industrial customer CapEx that you're obviously quite concerned about for easy-to-understand reasons. Is there another subset of revenue at all that you'd have the same concerns about or slightly less concerns about? Or I'm just trying to -- clearly, consumer, we can tell there's a good DIY opportunity there and the sustainability of it, we can all debate or is it pull forward or whatever. But I'm just trying to -- as they think through the broader buckets, just want to make sure that there aren't some other areas of revenue where you're as concerned as industrial CapEx spend in oil and gas.
Yes. Those are the 2 biggest ones that I think is appropriate to point out to our investors to say, look, these are the 2 big pots that we're paying attention to. And we've provided some color as to why we think we'll ride through, for instance, an industrial capital spending or big maintenance spending better than most. Then it's anecdotal. I mentioned the Marine Coatings business that mostly pleasure marines and yachts. And it's a smaller business, but because of the shutdown of their customer base and boatyards, we anticipate their revenues could be half in the fourth quarter of what they were a year ago. It's anybody's guess as to when those retailers and those boatyards open up as to whether we have a modest recovery.
Or depending on the health circumstances, if everybody is happy to put their boats back in the water, and there's a little bit of a spike in order flow from what's been a very economic impact of coronavirus- related shutdowns on that business. So we just -- we're monitoring business unit by business unit to try and assess those same questions. But we've highlighted in the call today, the big areas that we're paying attention to, and we think investors should as well.
We have our next question from Mike Harrison with Seaport Global Securities.
You mentioned, I think, primarily in performance, the $60 million to $70 million worth of product lines where you've been shedding some lower-margin business.
Can we just give a little bit of a sense on kind of where you are in those actions and when you start to lap those actions? And then I think you referenced some similar actions in other segments, including consumer. Have you started on those already? Or are those actions yet to come in other segments?
So yes, the answer to that is we started on those, but their impact will be in the future. And I would anticipate by the time we're done with our MAP to Growth program that on the $60 million to $70 million million to come and maybe a little bit more. And that would come mostly outside of our Performance Coatings Group and our Construction Products Group. So it would be a little bit in specialty and some -- principally some far away overseas operations in our Consumer segment.
All right. And then just in terms of the MAP to Growth, the areas that are being disrupted or delayed. What are some of the things that you can still move forward on? And what are you stuck waiting until people can travel more freely? And then I guess the second issue behind that is, should we think of that delay as just once the stay-at-home orders are lifted, you'll get back to work? Or will it take time to ramp those activities back up? And so it could be longer after the stay-at-home order is lifted?
Sure. And so I'll highlight that from a cash flow perspective first. At -- in the first year of our MAP to Growth program, we were probably spending upwards of $30 million in outside consulting fees and related MAP to Growth fees. That's down or was down to about $4 million or $5 million on an annualized basis. And very quickly, about 3 or 4 weeks ago, we hardened all our manufacturing facilities in all our locations. And so if you are a nonessential employee, that includes me, you don't belong in our plants, and that includes outside contractors. And so the idea of having smaller consultants that were helping us with good idea.
So the people that have been working with our team, and we're now getting down to the kind of mid to smaller-sized manufacturing facilities to institute what we call fit events and these continuous improvement disciplines have been halted. I can assure you they're all eager to get back going. I have no idea when the world will be ready, and we will be ready to turn the green light on that. But I can assure you the second we are, those consultants are going to be eager to get back to work because when we halted their activity, we halted their payments.
The same thing is true on some accounting consolidation and ERP consolidation activities to the extent that we have fees that would be generated with paybacks that are, let's say, over a 3-year period, all that activity is halted. And so if we don't see a payback on some of the activity, even that we can do remotely that is inside of a year, those programs have been stopped both practically because we can't put people into our facilities personally and financially because some of the activities that we're going to have a payout which is a good IRR, but still a payout longer than 2 or 3 years has been halted. And I would tell you the things that all good companies are thinking about is capital structure, cash flow and liquidity and cash generation. So in things large like reducing planned CapEx by $25 million or $30 million with the belief that we could do more and things small like every $50,000 or $500,000 contract with an outside consultant, they're all being canceled or delayed.
We have our next question from Josh Spector with UBS.
Just on the raw material front. You guys talked about more moderating raw material inflation, not necessarily declines. I was wondering if you could provide some more color on where you're seeing increases? And related to that, if oil kind of stays where it is, which I know is a big if, what point would you start to expect to see some of those savings flow through the P&L?
Great question. And so initially, we were seeing some tightening in certain raw material categories and availability has seemed to ease off. The flip side is, over the last year or so one of the categories that was defined raw material deflation was metal packaging. And I would anticipate with what's happening globally in certain categories that maybe we'll finally see some relief in that category. So it's been circumstantial around different categories. There's no doubt that with oil prices being where they are if they settle into a sustained area that there will be some solvent and resin categories that will see some decreases in costs versus where we sit today.
That's helpful. And I guess related to that, as we look across the different segments if raw materials were to decline meaningfully, how quickly would you expect prices to react in the industrial and construction segments? And maybe converse to that, how slow would pricing react in Consumer segment?
It's really hard to say at this point in time. We are holding on to the pricing that we've been able to affect over the last 1.5 years.
We needed that because of a 2.5-year cyclical raw material increase. We're not back to where we were in terms of that mix 2.5 years ago. But at this point, most of our customers are focused on supply, fill rates, they need it. And it's been a -- supply chains across industries have had to be more nimble because of the spikiness of order flows. And so that's where we are today. We don't have a good -- I don't have a good answer to that question. And I don't think that that will really unfold for another quarter or 2.
Our next question is from Arun Viswanathan with RBC Capital Markets.
I just wanted to understand, I guess, when you look at your commentary that some of your international locations are closed, so should we expect, I guess, the greatest decline in your Q4 sales in both construction products and industrial. Is that the right way to think about it?
Yes. So our Performance Coatings Group and our Construction Products Group, what was formerly our industrial segment, has our greatest exposure to markets outside of North America. And Europe is seeing -- has been seeing weak demand as we've been communicating for a year. We've had some spots of brightness there in the last couple of quarters. But not quite half of our European operations were -- have been closed at one time or another. So there's been more aggressive government-mandated closures in various countries in Europe than we've seen in North America.
And so as I commented earlier, it's true throughout Latin America and India, and those are predominantly Performance Coatings and Construction Product Group businesses.
Okay. And so I guess just trying to understand how this works. I mean when you guys do take a plant down, I think you noted that was about 6% of your sales potentially that are affected by closed plants. Is it effectively that whole 6% is lost? Or is it -- are you kind of thinking that maybe 50% of that amount is lost? And how does that relate to the inventory, I guess, do you guys already have inventory on hand to potentially service some customers? Or is it just kind of stops for the time the plant is down?
No, no, that's correct. I mean we have inventory on hand. And depending on the nature of the different business, we can cover close-downs without much disruption for as long as 20 or 30 days. After that, your inventory depletion based on certain product categories can be problematic in one particular formula or color versus others. But it's very circumstantial to plants. As I said, we had a plant in Norway that was closed as part of our Performance Coatings Group, that's been reopened. We split a single -- a marine coating single shift plant into 2 shifts. We had an infection on a shift. We closed the plant for 2 days, aggressively disinfected it and quarantined the shift of the people that were working with the individual that was infected and brought back the other shift that was not.
And so I could give you a plant-by-plant circumstance. I think all companies who are operating are becoming much more nimble as to how to segregate shifts, how to do cleaning between shifts, how to under -- we had a plant where a contractor who was into repair equipment was diagnosed with coronavirus, and he had been in that plant 10 days prior. And we didn't know it for 10 days. We closed the plant. It's actually a plant currently closed, and we're closing it for 6 days. We're cleaning that plant, and that's 6 days plus the 10 days when the last time the contractor was in there, it's a 16-day period.
Interestingly, the plants that have been affected in the United States are all metropolitan New York, New Jersey area. And from what we can tell, they've been all at-home infections because we haven't not had any hotspots and our efforts to close a plant, clean it and then bring people back in the appropriate circumstantial. Inventory plays a big part having a protocol by which you understand how quickly you can get back in business. And then understanding what the government mandates our, so for instance, we're closed in our 2 major plants in India. And they're set to reopen in another couple of weeks, that closure could be extended. And we don't know yet. There's been closures in other countries that have occurred, and then we've had reopenings.
Okay. So I guess it all depends on how long the plants are down for. So I guess just a follow-up.
So typically, I guess, the inventory levels that you do keep at various plants that also varies. But -- or should we assume it's kind of maybe at least maybe 30 days or so? So if there's a 30-day shutdown, maybe you can manage through that? Or is that the right way to think about it?
It varies business by business, but I do think that in almost all of our businesses, we could get by for a period of 20 to 30 days. But after that, you begin to negatively impact your ability to supply customers, particularly in more uniquer product categories.
Yes. We have not seen at this point, nor do we anticipate any closures anywhere of 30 days or more, but circumstances could be different in different parts of the world.
Great. And just lastly, similarly, on the supply chain. So I know a couple of years back, you had some issues with sourcing MMA, maybe out of Asia and some other raws. Has any of that transpired? Do you expect any of that? Is that kind of factored into your statement about maybe not expecting as much of a tailwind from the raws side? Or how are you thinking about the supply chain for your input costs?
Yes, we try and pay attention to that every day. I commented earlier on silicone, which was an issue a few weeks back. Seems to be okay today. Cleaning product and this one should not be a surprise. Cleaning product, raw materials are an issue. And we get what we need relative to past allocations. In some cases, we cannot get what we need to meet an explosive demand. And so that is a product category that we pay attention to a lot. That impacts some of our consumer businesses. So those categories are significantly ahead of prior years. But in certain circumstances, it may not be meeting demand because of raw material supply. The same is true in our Legend Brands business that makes HEPA filter equipment and filters and industrial disinfecting and cleaning products, including products that are sold into hospitals. That was before all this happened, and we could sell more of those products if we could get more raw materials.
We have our next question from Kevin McCarthy with Vertical Research.
I just wanted to probe a little bit more on the subject of decremental margins. As you look across the portfolio, are there businesses that would stand out to you as having unusual ratios of fixed versus variable costs on either end of the spectrum? Trying to get a handle on how we might take some of these larger-than-normal sales variances and then take that down to the bottom line during this period of dislocation.
Sure. I don't know that that's particularly true, in general, across RPM. Obviously, every business has its own breakeven point. If it's truer in certain segments than others, it would be in our specialty segment.
And so you have businesses like our DayGio fluorescent color business or other specialty segment businesses that have lower-than-average gross margins, but higher-than-average EBIT margins. And so they do have a fixed point there. You're already seeing that in the revenue challenges that we've been having in the last couple of quarters in our Specialty Products Group. Those numbers would have been somewhat worse were it not for the MAP to Growth programs. But in general, when you look across our Construction Products Group, you look across our Performance Coatings Group, there's a high level of variability between raw material costs, which obviously are variable to sales and probably represent 40% of our P&L and selling costs which, depending on the business, are split maybe 50-50 between fixed and variable or 2/3 fixed and 1/3 variable, but a pretty high level of variability in a lot of our businesses.
Okay. That's helpful. And then Frank, I wanted to ask, having suspended the share repurchases, which I expect a lot of companies will do. What is your current view on M&A? Have you hit the pause button there as well? Or do you see some opportunities with lower multiples, for example?
Sure. Well, we have hit the pause button on that. We are looking at a couple of smaller-sized transactions that were all but done, and I think we're working with those businesses on what to do in terms of timing and other items. But in terms of new transactions, I think our cash flow that had been devoted to looking at acquisitions and/or repurchasing our stock. And as you can see, our cash flow generation is better than it's ever been will be devoted to continuing our operations, maintaining our dividend and everything else to repaying debt.
We have our last question from Kevin Hocevar with Northcoast Research.
As you -- obviously, the coronavirus has impacted the U.S. in different places at different times in different degrees, and the states have responded differently in terms of how they're prohibiting construction activity. So as we look at -- do you have any visibility in terms of the states that are most prohibitive in terms of construction, like New York, Michigan, places like that? How your construction end markets are doing versus other parts of the country, where there's less prohibitive restrictions in place? Just curious if you have any visibility and can separate between the different regions there?
Sure. For the most part, construction activity, in general, and particularly as it relates to infrastructure is up and running throughout North America. The -- most states are following the Department of Homeland Security guidelines, which qualify construction activity as essential. The state that I'm aware of and this could be different in other places. The state that I'm aware of that had the harshest focus on construction was Pennsylvania, and the construction industry worked with the Governor's office to talk about PPE protocols and social distancing and what was happening in other states. And within a week or 10 days, the original halting of construction activity in Pennsylvania was eased. And I believe now Pennsylvania is following the Department of Homeland Security guidelines on construction.
We saw a similar order in Qubec, province of Canada, and that has also been eased somewhat. The rest maintenance of certain PPE and social distancing protocols. In a number of our areas, it's truer than most. When you're doing roofing activity or you're in the USL business and your activity is outside or outdoors, I think there's less concern, if you're doing flooring work and you can maintain all those protocols.
Again, I mentioned spiky business. One of the reasons we're seeing spiky business in that business activity is it requires the shutdown of a manufacturing operation to get in and do rehab and/or replacement of floors, whether it's manufacturing facilities, institutional facilities, and in particular, for roofing schools and universities. Those all have closure areas that are allowing for some of the construction activity that we do. And so we'll see whether that's been beneficial for us or perhaps is pulling some summer work into the fourth quarter. But it's very spiky, and we'll report the results in July when we have our fourth quarter results final.
Okay. Great. And then on the DIY side, the strength that you're seeing there, what's your sense? I mean is this something you believe is more of a near-term phenomenon as people are -- have stay-at-home orders in place that they're looking for things to do, going to Home Depot and doing a small project themselves?
Or -- and when those orders are lifted that maybe we get back to normal? Or is this a trend that you think could last for a while as maybe people don't want contractors coming into home and look to do things themselves. Just curious your thoughts there.
Sure. It really depends. I think that this will be somewhat spiky now because people are at home, and they -- when they're tired of watching Netflix, they can get at the small project paint or home decorating and repair activity that they want. There is a decided shift to people doing it themselves as opposed to having outside contractors come in and do it for them.
It would be nice to think that things would revert back to normal. So a slower level of POS, perhaps when the world gets back to more normal. This goes without saying. I think some of it depends on how quickly medical advances save the day, if you will. And if that doesn't happen, and for instance, in the United States, we're seeing a meaningful and sustained unemployment rate that's 10%, 12%, which some people believe for a period of time. That will negatively impact our DIY business over time. But all of that circumstantial to what's coming this summer and this fall related to the impact of the coronavirus and how quickly people can get back to work and what the medical outcomes relative to vaccines or treatments are.
Thank you. I will now turn the call back over to Frank Sullivan for closing remarks.
Thank you very much, Vanessa. I'd like to thank our associates around the world for their efforts. They have continued to grow the business while carrying out our MAP to Growth restructuring program very effectively. Now they're demonstrating incredible resilience by also finding ways to protect their health, support their communities and maintain our business operations. In particular, I'd like to thank the men and women who courageously show up to work every day in our manufacturing facilities and distribution centers. These frontline associates are keeping RPM running to the benefit of all of our associates, our customers and our shareholders.
We look forward to updating you on our fiscal 2020 fourth quarter and year-end results in July. In the meantime, we'd like to thank you very much for being on today's call. And we wish you and your families happiness and good health as we all manage through this extraordinary time. Thank you for participating in our call today, and have a great day.
And thank you, ladies and gentlemen. This concludes our conference. We thank you for your participation. You may now disconnect.
Good day, everyone. And welcome to the FY '20 Third Quarter Earnings Call for Richard Electronics, hosted by Ed Richardson. My name is Leslie, and I'm the event manager. [Operator Instructions]
And now I would like to turn it over to your host, Ed Richardson. Please go ahead.
Good morning, and welcome to Richardson Electronics Conference Call for the Third Quarter of Fiscal Year 2020. Joining me today are Robert Ben, Chief Financial Officer; Wendy Diddell, Chief Operating Officer and General Manager for Richardson Healthcare; Greg Peloquin, General Manager of our Power & Microwave Technologies group; and Jens Ruppert, General Manager of Canvys. We're all calling in from remote locations, and as a reminder, this is -- call is being recorded and will be available for audio playback.
I would also like to remind you that we'll be making forward-looking statements, and they're based on current expectations and involve risks and uncertainties, more so than ever today. Therefore, our actual results could be materially different. Please refer to our press release and SEC filings for an explanation of our risk factors.
I'm pleased to report that we made a small profit in our third quarter. Given the healthcare concerns that dominate our attention, this is a testament to the Richardson team, particularly throughout Asia where the coronavirus impact reached a critical level during the quarter. Today, more than 20% of our business comes from this region. As we continue to monitor the coronavirus developments closely, the health and well-being of our employees, customers, suppliers, relatives and friends throughout the world are of the greatest importance to us. Being prepared and maintaining a safe work environment is critical to sustaining our business operations.
Richardson Electronics is considered an essential business. We continue to manufacture and distribute products on a global basis. In addition to adhering to social distancing guidelines and other health measures, we're taking the necessary precautions at the local level to protect our employees. We've implemented work-from-home capabilities. We've put policies in place to mature employees who are ill do not come to work and have no concerns about the security of their jobs. For those with other health concerns, we're employing flexible policies to address individual needs. Travel has been severely restricted. We suspended all customer and supplier visits to our facilities. Through all of these actions, we're able to offer uninterrupted deliveries of products and support to our customers and suppliers.
I'll now turn the call over to Bob Ben, who'll provide a detailed recap of our third quarter financials. Then Greg, Wendy and Jens will discuss the individual business unit performance, including more details regarding the impact of the coronavirus.
Thank you, Ed, and good morning. I will review our financial results for our third quarter and first 9 months of fiscal year 2020, followed by a review of our cash position. First, I am pleased to say that the company reported an operating income of $11,000 for the third quarter of fiscal 2020 as compared to an operating loss of $0.8 million in the third quarter of last year.
While total company net sales for the third quarter of fiscal year 2020 decreased 2% to $38.2 million compared to the prior year's third quarter of $39.0 million, net sales for Canvys increased for the third quarter of fiscal year 2020 by $0.3 million or 3.5%. Sales of semiconductor wafer fab equipment specialty products also increased from last year's third quarter.
PMT net sales benefited from higher sales of power conversion in RF and microwave components, although overall sales for PMT decreased $0.7 million or 2.5%. This was primarily due to economic softness in the power grid tube market and lower sales in China due to the coronavirus.
Richardson Healthcare net sales decreased $0.2 million or 11.9% as a result of lower sales of equipment in Latin America and noncore diagnostic imaging parts partially offset by higher sales of our ALTA750 CT Tube, which grew by 135% over the prior year's third quarter.
Gross margin for the quarter improved to 33.1% of net sales compared to 31.5% of net sales in last year's third quarter. This was primarily due to a favorable product mix and improved manufacturing performance in both PMT and Richardson Healthcare. Canvys gross margin of 32.8% was the same as last year's third quarter.
Operating expenses decreased to $12.7 million for the third quarter of fiscal 2020 compared to $13.1 million in the third quarter of fiscal 2019. The decrease in operating expenses resulted from lower severance, legal and professional services expenses partially offset by higher research and development expenses for Richardson Healthcare as we invest in additional CT X-ray tube types.
As I mentioned, the company reported an operating income of $11,000 for the third quarter of fiscal 2020 as compared to an operating loss of $0.8 million in the third quarter of last year. This is a result of the improved gross margin and lower operating expenses.
Other income for the third quarter of fiscal 2020, including interest income and foreign exchange, was $0.1 million compared to other income of less than $0.1 million in the third quarter of fiscal 2019. The income tax provision of $0.2 million for the quarter reflected a provision for foreign income taxes, which was lower than in the prior year's third quarter and the U.S. tax benefit due to the valuation allowance recorded against the net operating loss. Although there is no tax benefit shown on our financial statements, from U.S. net operating losses, we can use our net operating losses to offset any cash tax liability reported in our U.S. federal income tax return. The amount of federal NOLs is $15.4 million. Overall, we had a net loss of $0.1 million for the third quarter of fiscal 2020 as compared to a net loss of $1.1 million in the third quarter of fiscal 2019.
Turning to a review of the results for the first 9 months of fiscal year 2020. Net sales for the first 9 months of fiscal year 2020 were $118.5 million, a decrease of 4.8% from the first 9 months of fiscal year 2019 net sales of $124.5 million. Net sales decreased by $7.7 million for PMT but increased by $1.7 million or 8.3% for Canvys.
Sales for Richardson Healthcare of $7 million were the same as last year. Gross margin increased to 32.3% from 31.5%, primarily reflecting favorable product mix in Richardson Healthcare and improved manufacturing performance for both PMT and Healthcare.
Operating expenses were $38.7 million for the first 9 months of the fiscal year, which represented a decrease of $0.9 million from the first 9 months of the last fiscal year. The decrease was due to lower severance, legal and professional services expenses partially offset by higher research and development expenses for Richardson Healthcare.
Operating loss for the first 9 months of fiscal year 2020 was $0.4 million, the same as for the first 9 months of fiscal year 2019. Other income for the first 9 months of fiscal 2020, including interest income and foreign exchange, was $0.2 million, the same as for the first 9 months of fiscal 2019. The income tax provision of $0.4 million for the first 9 months of fiscal 2020 primarily reflected a provision for foreign income taxes and no U.S. tax benefit due to the valuation allowance recorded against the net operating loss.
Overall, we had a net loss of $0.6 million for the first 9 months of fiscal year 2020 compared to a net loss of $1.0 million in the first 9 months of fiscal year 2019.
We continue to closely manage our cash position. Cash and investments at the end of the third quarter of fiscal 2020 were $43.9 million compared to $46.1 million at the end of the second quarter of fiscal 2020 and $49.4 million at the end of the third quarter of fiscal 2019. Capital expenditures were $0.4 million in the third quarter of fiscal 2020 compared to $1.0 million in the third quarter of fiscal year 2019, approximately $0.2 million related to our IT system, $0.1 million was for facilities projects and another $0.1 million was for our manufacturing business. On a year-to-date basis, capital expenditures totaled $1.2 million as compared to $3.2 million in the first 9 months of fiscal 2019.
Cash flow used in operations plus capital expenditures for the third quarter of fiscal 2020 was $1.4 million compared to $3.5 million in the third quarter of fiscal 2019. On a year-to-date basis, this amount was $3.6 million versus $8.4 million for the first 9 months of fiscal 2019.
We paid $0.8 million of dividends in the third quarter of fiscal 2020. In addition, based on our current financial position, our Board of Directors declared a $0.06 per common share quarterly dividend, which will be paid in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020.
To end on a positive note, during the quarter, we repatriated a total of $3.1 million from foreign locations. Total cash repatriated for the first 9 months of fiscal 2020 was $7.5 million. U.S. cash was $27.4 million at the end of the third quarter of fiscal 2020.
Now I will turn the call over to Greg, who will discuss the results for our Power & Microwave Technologies group.
Thank you, Bob, and good morning, everyone. PMT sales in third quarter of fiscal year 2020 were $28.9 million versus $29.7 million in Q3 FY '19. Our gross margin improved in the quarter to 32.8% versus 31.6% in the prior year, and we reduced our SG&A in the quarter. Q3 sales when compared to prior year were mainly impacted by the year-over-year sales decline in our legacy Tube business, an issue related to COVID-19 in China. However, this decline was partially offset by continued strong growth and our new technology partners supporting the RF and power markets and increased sales with our semiconductor wafer fab customers.
Another positive trend was our book-to-bill. BTB was 1.13x and was driven by strong bookings from our wafer fab customers, C tube product lines and our PMG business unit. Our bookings growth in our EDG business unit was based on continued engineering and logistic support of the wafer fab market and global infrastructure to support our OEM and MRO customers. The growth in PMG bookings was due to our new technology partners' products, our demand creation model, our numerous design wins in high-growth markets and a unique global business model. We continue to improve our global go-to-market strategy by investing in key business development resources to greatly improve and increase our customer contact in a more efficient manner.
As the market conditions dictate, we continue to manage our SG&A and invest in key growth areas. We also continue to implement strategies to improve our efficiencies and increase our customer contact.
These actions allow us to generate more opportunities in growing markets using our existing global infrastructure and head count. This will have a positive impact on our performance for the balance of the year and into the future.
Our revenue growth with our new technologies is being supported by key partners, such as Qorvo, MACOM, Anokiwave, United Silicon, ISM and Fuji Semiconductor. Our core legacy business continues to be greatly supported by the key tube manufacturers in the industry, such as CPI, Thales, NJRC and Photonis.
Of course, COVID-19 is having a net effect on Q4. As of this date, there have not been any large pushouts or cancellations. We are in consistent communication with our suppliers and customers. We are very excited about the booking trends in both business units, however, we know that there will be an adjustment period at some point in which the customers will adjust their backlog as they get more data on the global status of COVID-19.
It is interesting, though, as I have talked to all of you about 5G opportunities for the past few years and spent my career rolling out 3G, 4G and now 5G infrastructure to increase the ability to be mobile and communicate and manage data throughout the world. With there being a shortage of so many items with this pandemic, what we are not short on is bandwidth in wireless communications.
Wireless infrastructure was not put in over the years for this event. However, I started to think what we'd be dealing with if everyone in the world immediately worked from their home and manage their business and communicate without the implementation of 3G, 4G and now 5G infrastructure. We were able to take our entire organization on a global basis and get them started to work from the safety of their homes within hours after we implemented the stay-home policy. When we get through this, I believe there will be a major expedite of getting 5G capabilities throughout the world, and Richardson is very well positioned to support it. I can't stress enough the value of Richardson Electronics unparalleled capability and global go-to-market strategy that is unique to the power and RF and microwave industries. Our world-leading position in the manufacturing and distribution of electronic devices supports the legacy equipment as well as new equipment where solid-state cannot replace tubes. The combination of these 2 niche strategies separates us from our competition and has proven successful. Once this virus is controlled, we feel we are definitely in the right markets and have the right strategy to support the opportunities as they arise.
With that, I'll turn it over to Wendy Diddell in Richardson Healthcare.
Thanks, Greg, and good morning, everyone. Revenues generated from CT in the third quarter of FY '20 increased 135% over last year's third quarter. While we don't report the actual number of tubes sold or installed, we are happy to note that the number of ALTA tubes sold during the quarter increased over prior year and over our most recent second quarter. Our average selling price for the ALTA750 declined slightly during the quarter as we pushed customers to try our tube over new and used OEM tube. While we were happy with the increase, we all agree more would be better. Our longest-life tube is now nearing 700 days.
Total healthcare sales in the third quarter were below prior year due primarily to the continuing significant decline in equipment sales. This is the result of ongoing economic issues throughout Latin and South America. Nearly all of our customers in these regions remain under financial pressure. This market will come back, and we'll be ready to support it when it does. In the interim, we speak regularly to all of our customers throughout the region and help them with critical parts supply and technical support.
Gross margin in the third quarter was 38.3% of sales, a fantastic improvement over 26.2% in Q3 last year. The improvement is due to product mix as well as improvements in manufacturing.
Producing CT tubes is a very difficult business. Companies who have been doing this for decades are constantly challenged by the operational demands placed on the product. Manufacturing tubes requires extreme and continual high levels of equipment and personnel performance. There is very little margin for error. With our team of experienced engineers and production technicians, the majority of whom came from leading CT tube manufacturers, we are confident we will continue to find solutions to improve our internal yields and increase the performance of our tubes. This, along with putting additional tube types into production, will help drive margins up in the future.
Throughout the quarter, we applied a full-court press to generate sales of the ALTA750. We reached out to every former, current and potential tube customers, including service providers and end users. We confirmed CT systems under contract and reminded everyone of the benefits of using our tube. Now we wait for a tube to fill on a scanner that's not covered under a service contract. We are prepared and will continue to stay in front of our customers.
Now fast forward several weeks, and we are faced with an unprecedented challenge. COVID-19 has brought much of our proactive selling efforts to a halt. Face-to-face meetings have been put on hold, and most hospital personnel are not taking sales calls. However, this is a short-term issue. We've all read and are questioning if tube sales will increase with the use of CT scans to help diagnose the virus. In fact, right now, the opposite may be true. Many of our third-party service providers are telling us that they have seen a drop in service call volume in recent weeks. That's because hospitals have canceled all noncritical surgeries and they're closing nonessential medical facilities so that all resources are ready and available for coronavirus patients. This, too, is expected to be short-term with a spike in demand when COVID-19 is under control. Again, we are ready with parts and tubes.
Throughout this period, we are still offering 24/7 technical support and manning our product helpline. We are spending regular e-mail reminders to everyone in our database so they know where to turn when a part or tube is needed. We are checking in with our service partners and offering assistance. So far, our carriers are operating business as usual, and we have a team of people making sure our parts are ready to ship, no matter what time of the day or night they are needed. Our best wishes go out to those fighting on the front lines of the pandemic. We thank them for their service and for putting themselves at risk to take care of others.
As an essential business, our engineering and production teams continue with development and manufacturing. They're either working remote or in the plant under social distancing guidelines. We are working closely with our suppliers. Those that initially close due to shelter-in-place directives have reopened to support essential businesses, such as ours. We have had some prototype delays due to coronavirus-related personnel issues outside of Richardson Healthcare. We anticipate this will push testing of the G tube to early fall, with our launch planned for late January 2021. So just a short delay. Our efforts to develop a process for repairing a third tube are also underway, and we are exploring ways to expedite release. In both cases, it is more important to get the tubes right than to launch too early.
Finally, we continue to work with regulatory bodies in other countries, including China, Korea and Russia as well as smaller countries, such as the Ukraine. We are also working to ensure that we have both U.S. and EU approvals for the G tube at the time of launch. We appreciate your ongoing support as well as your patience.
At this point, I will turn the call over to Jens Ruppert to discuss third quarter results for Canvys.
Thanks, Wendy, and good morning, everyone. Canvys, which includes the engineering, manufacture and sale of custom displays to original equipment manufacturers in industrial and medical markets, delivered strong performance with sales of $7.2 million during the third quarter of fiscal 2020, an increase of 3.5% over the same period last year. The revenue increase for the quarter was related to increased customer demand in North America.
Gross margin as a percentage of net sales was 32.8% during the third quarter of fiscal 2020, the same as during the third quarter of fiscal 2019. Q3 fiscal 2020 was another strong quarter for Canvys with a book-to-bill of 1.57x. We were able to increase our backlog again to an all-time high in recent history. Our backlog consists of purchase orders that typically ship over 1 or more years. Customers issue call off orders that vary quarter-to-quarter based on customer demand, component availability and other factors. The healthy backlog position, along with the number of projects that are currently in the engineering stage, position us well for continued growth.
During the quarter, we received several new orders from both existing and first-time medical OEM customers. Applications where our displays are used are numerous. Some of these include cryolipolysis systems that break down fat cells by cooling off body fat; refractive surgery a laser system for therapeutic and refractive applications of cutting-edge corneal surgery; patient monitoring where our monitors are installed at patient beds or remote locations, such as central nurse stations; medical device control, capturing high-resolution images and live video from up to 2 surgical imaging devices; radiotherapy where highly customized displays are used to monitor the patients during the radiation treatment; diagnostic monochrome displays that are DICOM compliant; high-definition displays used for endoscopy applications; human-machine interface for electrosurgical devices, electrosurgery is application of high-frequency alternating polarity electrical current through biological tissue as a means to cut and coagulate tissue precisely and with limited blood loss; and dental treatment centers where patients can review radiographic images or live video from an intraoral camera or other video feeds, such as educational or videos or promotion.
In the nonmedical space, we received orders for various displays and all-in-one products. Applications include this place with an embedded RFID reader and USB hub used as human-machine interfaces for surface inspection machines, human-machine interfaces for ticketing machines in public transportation sectors, and tailor prompter, talent monitors and clocks used in the broadcast market for popular news stations around the world.
We continue to look for new customers through trade shows, online marketing, referrals and cold calling. The LCD and flat-panel industry has been hit hard by the coronavirus outbreak as China-based manufacturers have major production lines in Wuhan, the epicenter of the epidemic. The epidemic has disrupted production across almost all information and communication technology sectors leading many firms without components and material supplies. The chip resistor inventory, for example, has reached a 10-year low level. Our lead times have been impacted as well, and we don't see them coming back to normal soon.
The impact of the coronavirus outbreak is expected to affect it all up to 20% in the global flat panel output. It is difficult to quantify the impact specifically to our business at this time. We do expect some customer pushouts. While several of our customers are considered essential businesses, like we are, they're operating on a reduced output basis for now. Many others are closed. Considering all the new programs we are working on with existing as well as new customers. I'm optimistic that we will continue growing our business once we are past the effect of the coronavirus.
We have proven ourselves to be a highly reliable, versatile technology company with the ability to meet a diverse number of display requirements as well as being in compliance with the upcoming of MDR. We offer our key customers safety stock options, enabling them to react quickly on unexpected increased demands and helping bridge interruptions in the supply chain, such as we are seeing with the coronavirus.
I will regularly review and adjust our business strategy with the goal of further improving the operating performance of the division, taking into consideration any changes that result from an extended epidemic. For now, we remain ready to serve our customers and play an important role in supply chain management for critical industries, such as healthcare, manufacturing and transportation.
I will now turn the call back over to Ed.
Thanks, Jens, for an excellent quarter. I want to thank all the Richardson employees globally for continuing to focus on the business while paying attention to the safety precaution established by the CDC and the World Health Organization. As an essential business, we're asking a lot from our employees, who continue to work through this extraordinary time to support our customers. While we'll likely experience a decline in demand in the near term, our flexibility and willingness to work closely with our customers and suppliers will put us in a very strong position to deliver when the coronavirus is defeated.
Now more than ever, we'll continue to stay focused on cash management. We have significant cash on hand to weather the coronavirus, but that doesn't mean we won't feel the impact. We will review all capital expenditure requests and will adjust resources based upon significant changes in demand. There's a tremendous amount of pressure for us to buy our stock back. While we agree it's severely undervalued, our priority is maintaining cash to support our growth initiatives for long-term shareholder benefit.
We're convinced our healthcare strategy is solid. Canvys will continue to win new display programs, and our investment in RF and wireless technologies for critical infrastructure expansion will pay off. Supporting these initiatives will be a good use of our cash. Our position and the position of our Board has not changed in this regard. At this point, we'll be happy to answer a few questions. Please note, we're all in different locations, so bear with us.
[Operator Instructions] And we do have a question. It comes from the line of Marc Silk.
Mr. Richardson, you've mentioned cash management, the capital expenditures, cash, a few times. I've seen your cash go from $60 million a few years ago down to $43.9 million. I brought this up before, and I think now with what's going on in the world, I think it makes sense that -- I think your salary is excessive. I think the right thing to do, even if you cut your salary in half, it's still a very healthy salary. And I think you got to do the right thing and show an example that you're sacrificing just like everybody else in the company.
So I'd like to hear that comment because the last time we talked about this, you said you haven't paid yourself in a long time, but sounds to me like the last few years between that and dividends, you've been doing very well. It's very hard for me to add to my position when you're using this as a piggy bank. So I would like you to comment on that because I think other shareholders feel the same way. So thank you for taking my call, and good luck.
Thanks, Marc. Well, we certainly appreciate your opinion. Now what we have done during this period of time, and we're doing it again is the incentives for the executive team have been cut dramatically, and that's continued. So even though as a total gross number, it looks to be quite large to you, I understand it's far less than what we've been paid in the past. So we'll take your comment under consideration.
And on the buyback, you're going to hold off for now, correct? Because I think having cash is very important.
That is correct. We are not going to buy any more stock back at this juncture.
Your next question comes from the line of Harry Sauers.
Well, first off, congratulations on a quarterly profit. I was a bit concerned for some time there, and that brings me a little bit of hope as a shareholder here as well as your continued commitment to the quarterly dividend. As you discussed with Marc, I mean, your stock is trading at these ridiculously depressed levels, but I understand that, of course, having cash is important. How do you expect that cash is going to be used in light of this situation, say, if it were to continue on for another year?
Well, I don't think any of us really have an idea of what's going to happen with the coronavirus issue. And at this juncture, we want to take sort of a wait and see and be prepared. I think as we do better with the tube, the CT Tube manufacturing, our under absorption continues to go down and the cost, frankly, of the tube goes down, so the margins will go up. And I believe in the near term, if we get back to normal, that we'll go cash flow neutral, and that would be a wonderful situation to have. But at the moment, we're going to take a wait-and-see attitude.
Definitely, as a shareholder, I agree with you. That would be a wonderful situation to see. I pulled up some statistics this morning that suggested that the average CEO of an electronics manufacturing company earns a bit over $200,000 in salary. This is from the Bureau of Labor statistics. What makes you, Mr. Richardson, worth nearly 4x that, plus performance bonuses?
Well, again, the amount of salary that I've taken and -- has been pretty much common now since the company has gone public years ago. As I mentioned, currently, we're taking cash incentive reductions, so I appreciate your opinion on it. It's been a fact of life with the company, and I don't see it changing in the future, even.
Well, I didn't offer an opinion there. I asked what makes you worth it.
I guess, 50 years' experience in the business, which doesn't exist anywhere else in the tube business.
Interesting. So regarding your Canvys business segment, what does the operating profit or loss look like?
Jens, do you want to address that?
Yes. Hello, this is Jens here. I mean I think we shared the numbers in the -- during the call, right? So we are making an operating contribution, and we are growing the business year-over-year since several years now. So I think it's a very positive business development right now.
I'm having a bit of trouble here seeing the synergy of Canvys with your other business lines of PMT and healthcare, I guess, aside from the integration of healthcare displays. And to be quite frank with you, the canvys.com website, it looks like it was made in 2003 and not updated since. Don't you think that a larger business with better business synergies and more ability to inject cash into growing Canvys might be a better fit?
So I'll leave this up to Ed to answer, but thanks for making me aware of the website. We are actually working on our website right now and refreshing it and making it nicer and appearing more like the healthcare and the rest of the company. So I think many years back before I was hired actually -- sorry?
I said that's a relief. Thank you, I'm glad to hear that.
Yes. And many years back, there was a strategic position at Richardson before I was hired to buy several display companies and then merger them together, and I think that's paying off. So we are pretty happy with production locations in Europe, in Germany, and also on the East Coast in America, and a global supply chain that works for us. And we have other areas where we work closely together with the Richardson Healthcare team. For example, we have global certifications, we have the ISO 13485 globally, we have a quality system that is globally in place for medical devices. So we all benefit from that. I think it's a pretty good fit now.
Anything to you'd want to add?
Yes. I mean we looked at that for years when the business was not profitable, and frankly, we set it up as a very independent company. So if and when it made sense for us to divest of the business, then we could do that. And fortunately, we were able to attract Jens to come to work for us a number of years ago. And with his knowledge of the medical industry and the display industry and also his hands on ability to manage people and reduce costs, he's done a fantastic job. And you listened to what the backlog is now and what the future looks like in that business, and I wish all of our businesses were doing as well as the display business that Canvys is doing. We certainly intend to have it as a critical part of our future.
Well, I'm glad he's doing a good job in that regard there. I certainly don't disagree with that, right? But especially if we need cash and the needs of Canvys customers and employees might be better served by somewhere with more capital to inject into it, I guess you and I are just going to have to agree to disagree on that point.
For the time being, yes, for sure.
If you're calling certain parts of Richardson Healthcare "noncore", why have you not hired an investment banker to divest those parts and refocus on your core operations?
We really aren't calling any portion of Richardson Healthcare noncore. I -- if you came with -- away with that impression, certainly it wasn't intended.
Sure. That was a direct quote from this call. If it's not noncore, I can understand that, but there were parts of it that were referred to as noncore here.
Okay. I was...
Ed, Maybe I can answer that?
All right. Fine.
Yes. That was -- I think I made the comment that the sales decline was partially due to noncore parts. And what I was referring to there, the majority of our business, as everyone knows, is focused on Canon. And in the past, we had a few other vendors and product lines in the MRI space, in the coil space, where we had some part sales, but those programs weren't particularly efficient in terms of our investments in inventory dollars. So those are the ones when we look at quarter-over-quarter comparison, we had some sales in those last year, not a lot, as I mentioned, that didn't repeat this year because we've discontinued those efforts. But our core business, being the Canon parts, the tubes, et cetera, that -- those are performing very well. So I apologize for the confusion.
All right. That's very helpful for me then. Do you anticipate any inventory write-downs due to demand falling?
The -- I would reserve that only, again, for this coronavirus issue, we have no idea what's going to happen in the next few months. But other than that, we don't see any major write-downs. We have normal reserves that are established, and they're more than enough to cover any inventory write-downs at this point.
And do those same statements apply to your accounts receivable?
Yes. We've done -- our finance team has done an excellent job in keeping the accounts receivable current and getting the collections in on time here. They really do a fantastic job.
Yes. I definitely see you have very few doubtful accounts as of now, but I do understand that it's been a concern in a lot of businesses about the accounts receivable not being able to be collected on. So...
Well, it could happen. Again, with this coronavirus thing, people are going to say, "Gee, we've been closed for 2 or 3 months. You can't expect us to pay on time." But so far, we haven't seen that. But who knows what's going to happen in that area. We -- historically, that has not been a problem with the business.
And what do you attribute the CT Tube sales growth to? Because historically, the growth has been a little bit up and down. But I believe we're up 130% against this quarter over last year. Is that due to the impact of the coronavirus at all?
No. Wendy, do you want to answer that question?
Yes. So no, it is not due to the coronavirus at this point in time. Again, it's more a factor we've been saying since we launched the ALTA750 that the growth would be linear. And so quarter-over-quarter, the trend is just that, it's going up. The slope is not as steep as everybody would like it to be. But each quarter, we've shown -- with one or two exceptions, we've shown growth in the number of tubes. In the last quarter, 120 days or so, we've gone out very aggressively, making sure that we're positioned to win every opportunity that we come across. And so that's why, I think, we're seeing some of the growth now.
Do you anticipate any demand slowing in those due to the coronavirus?
Yes. Right now, we do. We're seeing a decline, again, in the number of calls, and our -- we've been talking to the third-party service companies that we partner with, and they're seeing a dramatic drop-off in their call volume. And the reason for that is because all nonessential, noncritical surgeries and procedures have all been postponed. And any equipment maintenance, any new installs, those kinds of things have also been put on hold because the hospitals don't want any disruption. They don't let visitors in their facility. So we think that's going to end up being pent-up demand when the coronavirus is under control, that we'll see the reverse of that. And you'll be able...
So in the short run, how material would that decline be?
I don't know. I don't know. I can't really define that at this point.
We have no further questions. [Operator Instructions] We do have a further question. It comes from Eric Landry.
So Ed and Wendy, I'd like to have a short discussion here about the healthcare segment. And Ed, you mentioned earlier in the call that you believe the healthcare strategy is solid, and you've made that now, and the business as it stands now is, I think we'd all agree, significantly less successful or solid than we had all hoped 1.5 years ago. So I'm wondering when you and Wendy and the Board would consider pivoting to more of a strategy that involves some OE manufacturing so that you can fill what to me looks like a gorgeous facility with nice modern equipment and lots of know-how inside a factory that appears to be pretty good at building tubes, yet nobody wants tubes that nobody wants to buy at this point. So if either of you could comment on whether or not there's been any thought to pivoting the strategy to something that might involve some more volume but perhaps maybe lower margins, so you could absorb some of those costs a little bit better than what I'm assuming are -- is being absorbed right now.
Well, I'll try to answer some of it. And then, Wendy, you're welcome to add your thoughts. First of all, we're well aware, for instance, on the Canon ALTA750 tube, that the tube is sold. It's made by Varex, as you know, imaging in it. It's sold to Canon for -- in the realm of $30,000 a tube or less. And quite frankly, our manufacturing cost today on the tube approaches that. So there would be -- for us to enter the OEM business and try to compete with Varex to sell the tubes to Canon would be practically no profit. And so we -- our total strategy with a company going back as long as I've been with the company is to compete with the OEMs for the aftermarket business. That's why we got into the CT manufacturing business to compete with Varex and Canon for the replacement business at a much higher-margin than is possible in the OEM business. And basically, it's a matter of cost and the market conditions that we haven't gone into OEM for that reason.
Wendy, do you want to add your comments on that?
Sure. So I think we've mentioned in the past that we haven't completely ruled it out. Ed is right, it would be very difficult for us to sell to the OEMs because the pricing is so low. So it's not just a matter of saying that we would take lower margin, it's whether we could make any margin at all. Having said that, we have been talking to -- in the past 12 months, we've been talking to different companies. And so if the opportunity presents itself and it's a good one where we can help develop a new OEM solution where we can make some money doing it, I think we would consider it, Eric, and I don't think we're ruling it out.
In the interim, while we do that, and the sales team is focused on not just the OEM in the healthcare space, but similar tubes that are also used in industrial applications or security applications. So while I can't say anything is imminent, it's not that those conversations are not being held. We absolutely are looking at some of those opportunities.
Now in the interim, as we've talked about, what we will do, which kind of has the same impact, is, again, look at what are the additional tubes that serve the end user, like Ed said, where we can provide tubes in the aftermarket and we're working on, as you know, the G. And we're -- also started a new project for a different brand and a different -- 2 different tube types. And as soon as we know more and we're comfortable with the schedule, we'll start to talk a little bit more about that. But right now, I wouldn't want to put it out there until we can confirm some dates.
And then finally, we're looking at other items and accessories that go hand-in-hand with those. As you know, we make the heat exchanger in the same facility. We do brush blocks. We're now looking at high- voltage multipliers. So there's other things that they're not huge quantity. It's not the OEM business, and we fully concede that, but there are other parts and products that we're looking at that can utilize the same resources and, as you said, the gorgeous facility, the new equipment that we have.
Okay. Wendy, that's somewhat comforting. But Ed, I still don't think I got an answer for why you think or still think that the healthcare strategy is solid, so let me just go back. The big reason that we bought the tube. Yet when we got to the point where it was time to sell the tube, nobody wanted to buy the tube, and there were all kinds of reasons for that. I guess, the OEM is a more stringent competitor than what everybody thought and this that and the other. I'm a little bit concerned that there's a lot of hopes being pinned on the G tube being manufactured, and I'm fearful that the situation with the G tube may be similar to the situation with the D tube. So we'll have two tubes to sell, but that will just mean that few people want to buy both tubes instead of just the one tube. So I'd like to know, Ed, what it is that makes you feel more comforted that with this G tube, you will all of a sudden have a viable business here, whereas at this point, it doesn't appear to be all that viable?
Well, I think, first of all, none of us think that 1 tube or 2 tube, makes a business in the CT tube area. And as Wendy mentioned, we're going forward to look at other manufacturers' tubes as well. And over the next few years, you'll see us release a number of tubes for other manufacturers so that we're not just a 1 tube shop, if you will. But at the same time, as you well know, the former CEO, their access on our Board. And I get a kick out of listening to him talk about Varex that it took them 20 years actually to develop the ALTA tube before they could actually get it to market on a reliable basis. And he feels -- and we've spent a lot of money, obviously, but he feels we're just right around the corner from having a successful business in the aftermarket space with the -- some of the new tubes we're bringing on. And -- but it's not a 2-year business. And I apologize if we led you to believe it was a 2-year business going here, it's not. It's a 5-year business plus before we can be in a breakeven kind of position. And it's certainly not what the investment world looks for in a 2- or 3-year term.
Okay. It's interesting that you mentioned a Board member, which I'm assuming is Mr. Kluge, and you said that his opinion is that brighter days are right around the corner. It would be helpful if investors could hear that from him because his actions sure don't indicate that he sees any type of a brighter future right around the corner. And I'm referring specifically to stock purchases, or in this instance, significant lack thereof, because he has been very inactive, meaning 0 purchases of stock that I can see. And it appears that he's a person of somewhat considerable means and could afford to buy the stock. So if investors could hear from his mouth that he believes that this is a very viable business in the not-so-distant future, I think that, that might override some concerns that maybe people have that this is a guy who has been on the Board for 2 years and hasn't bought one share of stock. So I guess what I would say to wrap it up is that actions speak louder than words, even given that, it would be helpful to hear it from his mouth and then maybe even to have some insider buying on his behalf would also be somewhat helpful.
No. I understand. And you've expressed that opinion before. He will be in for the annual shareholder meeting, and we talked about this and he said he'd be happy to answer questions at that time. So I can't answer the question for him.
Okay. That'd be great. I tried to talk to him at the last meeting, and he left early, so I didn't get a chance.
Last thing, I just want to make clear that both Jens and Greg, I guess, and Wendy, everybody is expecting material pushouts this quarter because of the virus, correct?
I think we don't know what to expect. I think that's the answer.
Okay. And the semiconductor business, is that -- does that appear to be affected as heavily as the other stuff?
No. They're also considered a essential business. And as a matter of fact, we're on a conference call with them tomorrow where they're going to give us an update. They're really concerned that they have to make deliveries on products and want to make sure that we're up to speed and can handle their requirements. So they're putting all their major vendors on conference calls to tell them what we need to do to fill their requirements, and we listen there. In these times, they're our biggest customer, that's for sure. That industry is our biggest customer.
Okay. I'm sorry to interrupt. We are running out of time, so now I would like to turn the call back to Ed for closing statements.
All right. Yes, thanks, Leslie. Well, thanks to all of you for joining us and for your ongoing interest in Richardson Electronics. We wish everyone good health during these unprecedented times, and we send best wishes to all of those impacted by the coronavirus. We look forward to discussing our fiscal 2020 fourth quarter and full year results with you in July.
Thanks very much. Any of you are welcome to call in later. We're happy to discuss more details with you at that time. Thanks.
Thank you, Ed, and thank you to all your speakers, and thank you, everyone. That concludes your conference call for today. You may now disconnect. Thank you for joining, and enjoy the rest of your day.
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for standing by, and welcome to the SMART Global Holdings Second Quarter Fiscal 2020 Earnings Call. [Operator Instructions] Please be advised that today's conference may be recorded. [Operator Instructions]
I would now like to hand the conference over to your speaker today, Ms. Suzanne Schmidt with Investor Relations. Please go ahead.
Thank you, operator. Good afternoon, and thank you for joining us on today's earnings conference call to discuss SMART Global Holdings second quarter fiscal 2020 results. Ajay Shah, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, will begin the call with a discussion of the market and the business; followed by Jack Pacheco, Chief Operating and Financial Officer, who will review the financial results in more detail and provide the forward guidance, after which we will open the call to your questions.
As a reminder, our earnings press release and a replay of today's call can be accessed under the Investor Relations section of SMART's website at smartgh.com. We encourage you to go to our website throughout the quarter for the most current information on the company, including information on the various financial conferences we will be attending.
Before we begin the call, I would like to note that today's remarks and the answers to today's questions may include forward-looking statements. Any statement that refers to expectations, projections, or other characterizations of future events, including financial projections and future market condition is a forward- looking statement. Actual results may differ materially from those expressed in these forward-looking statements. For more information, please refer to the risk factors discussed in the documents we file from time to time with the SEC, including our most recent Form 10-K. We assume no obligation to update these forward-looking statements which speak as of today.
Additionally, during this call, our non-GAAP financial measures will be discussed. Reconciliations for those directly comparable GAAP financial measures are included in today's earnings press release.
With that, I will now turn the call over to Chairman and CEO, Ajay Shah.
Thank you, Suzanne, and welcome to everyone on the call from, I assume, all of you at home. It is the most amazing time that we find ourselves in and our fiscal second quarter has been one of the most difficult we have seen in a long time given the environment around the world. However, our team at SMART has stepped up to the challenges and delivered strong operational and financial results with both revenue and non-GAAP earnings per share above the midpoint of our guidance range in spite of some delays we experienced in component availability from China and from some customer operations in China.
Ladies and gentlemen, please stand by, your conference call will resume momentarily. [Operator Instructions]
[Technical Difficulty]
Mr. Shah is reconnected now.
I'm sorry. I apologize for the difficulties that we had. I will start, again, since I was right close to the beginning. And as I was saying, our fiscal second quarter has been one of the most difficult we've seen in a long time given the environment around the world. However, our team at SMART has stepped up to the challenges and delivered strong operational and financial results with both revenue and non-GAAP earnings per share above the midpoint of our guidance range in spite of some delays we experienced in component availability from China and from some customers' operations in China.
The emergence of the COVID-19 crisis has clearly created operational challenges and macroeconomics uncertainties. But considering the circumstances, we've proactively taken the necessary steps to, first and foremost, prioritize the safety and well-being of our global workforce at SMART while, at the same time, keeping the company's operations functioning and serving our diverse customer base to ensure their continued success.
In the second fiscal quarter, our performance also benefited from a good macro environment for memory products and also from stability in Brazilian policies and the economy there. Furthermore, our acquisitions from fiscal 2019 are showing improved performance and increased potential with a robust pipeline of new business in place.
Finally and importantly, the convertible debt refinancing that we completed in early February this year is accretive to earnings and significantly strengthens our balance sheet and cash position to be able to better weather the challenges ahead and also to take advantage of the opportunities that will be created in this changing environment.
Today, we have our team around the world working from home or working in our manufacturing facilities, providing the essential services and products our customers need from us. While manufacturing operations continue in all of our facilities around the world so far, in some manufacturing locations, we are operating at reduced levels to keep within local guidelines and to maintain employee safety. Overall, we've been able to prioritize requirements with our customers and keep them satisfied.
In support of this effort, we were undertaking steps to secure our supply chain, properly reallocate our resources and device contingency plans to aggressively meet the challenges facing all of us today. From a supply chain perspective, we're functioning fairly well despite the disruption from COVID-19. As the crisis continues, we're running numerous contingency scenarios to mitigate these challenges as much as possible. In addition, our leadership team in all our locations around the world are engaging with their local communities and hospitals to support urgent needs in the areas.
Turning now to the review of each of our lines of business. In the second quarter of fiscal 2020, approximately 41% of revenues came from our Specialty Memory Products business, 36% from our Brazil business and 23% from our Specialty Computing Products business.
Starting now with Specialty Memory, which represented 41% of overall revenue and achieved about $111 million in revenues in the quarter. Our revenues in this quarter were 8% higher than the previous quarter despite some supply shortages and some shutdowns by our China-based suppliers. During the quarter, we introduced some of the first of a range of specialty SSD products based on our own recently developed firmware and controller technologies. Also, we're seeing a strong pipeline of new opportunities as we ramp up our sales efforts focused on a broader base of customers in new areas such as medical, industrial, defense and security.
During the second quarter, we had one of our strongest performances in terms of new design wins that resulted in additional customers and orders, some of which will start shipping as early as the third and fourth quarters of fiscal 2020. For example, the increase in IoT processing at the edge of the network is driving more demand for storage. And we won a new customer in the area of body cameras, a market segment where we were not present before. In addition, we had a very strong bookings quarter for our NVDIMM products, which offer a low-density alternative to 3D Crosspoint technology-based products.
Moving on now to our Brazil business, which grew by 4% over the previous quarter to reach $98 million in revenue approximately, 36% of our overall revenue. Brazil outperformed our expectations in what is normally a seasonally weak quarter due to calendar year-end shutdowns and holidays. Our mobile memory products experienced higher selling prices as we saw significant increases in the average density of mobile memory products shipped in the period. We've also had some exciting new mobile memory product introductions and products and qualification at our customers. Also, our DRAM products in Brazil performed well in the quarter and pricing held steady.
In Brazil, with the new manufacturing rules in place as of July last year and with our customers now clear about the new tax incentives that were signed into law at the end of December last year, we're now getting longer-term forecasts, and we are also participating to a greater degree in the higher-density product demand. Another new area of progress for our business in Brazil is the introduction of a line of LoRa-based IoT products for smart cities applications. We've received the first trial orders for some of these products. As you may know, LoRa is a long range, low power wireless technology that's become a de facto technology for IoT networks worldwide.
While it's difficult to anticipate the effects of COVID-19-related effects on the economy and operations in Brazil as well as the significant weakening of the Brazilian real versus the U.S. dollar that has happened recently, longer term, we remain optimistic about the prospects for profitable growth from this part of our business.
Our Specialty Computing line of business totaled $63 million of revenue in the quarter, representing approximately 23% of overall revenue. While this is also a seasonally weak period for this line of business, revenues in the quarter were further lower than expected due to delays of certain government-related orders. However, we've made significant progress in improving gross margins through operational improvements, integration and an improved mix of business with an increasing share of revenues coming from services in this business.
You may recall that this business can be lumpy and is dependent on large projects, particularly those for government agencies. The quarter was also notable in terms of our strong bookings of multiyear managed services contracts, which led to our strongest booking quarter ever in this business in terms of total contract value. During the quarter, we introduced the first of our solution sets for different vertical applications, utilizing GPU, or graphics processors, and CPU technologies, integrated with our networking and cluster management software tools for AI, HPC and other modeling and analytics applications. These solution set offerings are now leading our new systems bookings.
We're entering the second half of our fiscal year with a robust pipeline for new business across Specialty Compute and a solid competitive position post the recent industry consolidation, which has happened. And this has put us in a -- put us forward as a strong alternative for many large projects. Additionally, more and more applications are emerging driven by AI, edge computing and also, we're seeing new applications in our wireless computing products where we continue to win new designs in partnership with Qualcomm. We remain optimistic about the longer-term prospects across all of our specialty computing areas.
To further drive our efforts in these areas, we've integrated the management and many engineering, services and sales organizations across Embedded Computing and Penguin Computing businesses. This will help to drive further operating cost improvements as well as a broader set of product offerings to the marketplace and a stronger go-to-market effort.
In conclusion, these are clearly challenging times for all of us to navigate and indeed to forecast. However, the long-term underlying business trends point toward an increasing need for more data center, cloud and AI-related capabilities as well as greater requirements for specialized application-specific memory solutions, all of which leave us confident in our position to meet these demands in the future.
Finally, in examining our portfolio, our lines of business have very limited exposure to affected end markets such as automotive, travel and hospitality and real estate. We do have some exposure to oil and gas, and particularly in Brazil, to the consumer market. That said, we have a significant position in stronger end markets such as enterprise and infrastructure computing and communications, AI and HPC, government and defense applications and in enterprise computing -- in enterprise storage. We're in a strong financial position with over $140 million in cash and minimal current debt.
We have indeed run many financial simulations and scenarios and feel comfortable with our ability to withstand a prolonged downturn. As I said before, this should enable us to weather this storm and to be well positioned for the opportunities that will emerge.
With that, let me turn the call over to Jack for a review of our financials and our guidance. Jack?
Thank you, Ajay. Overall, gross revenue for the second fiscal quarter was $420.9 million, while net sales were $272 million. As a reminder, the difference between gross revenue and net sales is related to our Supply Chain Services business, which is accounted for on an agency basis, meaning that we only recognize as net sales the net profit on Supply Chain Services transaction.
A breakdown of net sales by end market, the second fiscal quarter was as follows: mobile and PCs, 34%; network and telecom, 24%; servers and storage, 11%; industrial, defense and other, 31%.
Now moving to the rest of the income statement. Non-GAAP gross profit for the second quarter was $52.9 million compared with last quarter's $55.7 million, primarily due to product mix. Non-GAAP operating expenses were $35.6 million compared with $37.5 million in the previous quarter as we had lower audit stocks as well as trade show-related expenses. Non-GAAP net income for the second quarter was $12.8 million or $0.52 per diluted share compared with $13.4 million or $0.55 per diluted share in the previous quarter, and adjusted EBITDA totaled $22.3 million compared with $23.5 million in the prior quarter.
Turning to working capital. Our net accounts receivable totaled $217.4 million compared with $228.8 million last quarter. Our days sales outstanding decreased to 47 days for this quarter compared with 50 days last quarter. Inventory totaled $161.4 million at the end of the second quarter compared with $160 million at the end of the first quarter. Inventory turns remained flat at around 9% for both quarters. Consistent with past practice, accounts receivable, days outstanding and inventory turnover are calculated on a gross sales and cost of goods sold basis, which were $420.9 million and $369.4 million, respectively, for the second quarter.
We entered the second quarter with $141.9 million of cash and cash equivalents compared with $111.4 million at the end of the prior quarter. Second quarter cash flow from operations totaled $23.3 million compared with $25.3 million in the prior quarter. We exited our second quarter with a very strong balance sheet as well as a vastly improved capital structure.
We issued $250 million of convertible notes on February 11, 2020, and used $204.9 million of the proceeds to pay off our existing term loan, thereby extending our debt maturity out to 2026, which means we do not have any term loan debt payments for 6 years. We also used $21.8 million of proceeds to purchase capped calls, which is expected to reduce dilution to the shareholders upon conversion of the notes.
The maturity of our $50 million revolving line of credit was also extended out 5 years. We did not have any revolver drawdown at the end of Q2 nor do we anticipate during the third quarter as we expect to continue to generate cash during our third quarter. Completing our debt refinancing reduces our cash spend on interest as well as our interest expense booked each quarter by over $3 million per quarter. And this, along with eliminating our cash spend on amortizing our debt each quarter, which was approximately $5.6 million, will save us over $9 million in cash per quarter, beginning in our third quarter. For those of you tracking CapEx and depreciation, CapEx was $4.2 million for the quarter and depreciation was $6 million.
And now let me touch on some of the financial and operational dynamics we are currently facing. At this time, all of our manufacturing facilities across the globe are operating and servicing our customers, as Ajay mentioned earlier. We're still seeing strong demand from our customers in our third quarter, and our guidance reflects this current view of the quarter. We have analyzed and continued to assess our customers and their end markets for weaknesses and strength, i.e., oil and gas is expected to be weaker, while our networking, telecom, server and storage businesses, which are some of our largest end markets, looks to be performing stronger due to the increased demand for cloud, Internet services and telecom.
The worldwide crisis due to COVID-19 has also further weakened the Brazilian real to new levels. We are not seeing this impact consumer spending yet but believe it could have a negative impact on the Brazilian economy, which had expected positive GDP growth for 2020. We have taken a number of steps to minimize its impact on the company by having foreign exchange forward contracts for accounts payable, which we believe should minimize FX losses from payments. As a reminder, we price in U.S. dollars, and we convert to the real when we invoice in order to minimize any negative impact to us. We will continue to monitor the situation in Brazil very carefully and work to minimize any resulting impact to our business.
With that as a backdrop, let me now turn to our guidance for the third quarter of fiscal 2020. We currently estimate that our third quarter net sales will be in the range of $270 million to $300 million. The midpoint of which represents an increase of 5% sequentially. Gross margin for the quarter is estimated to be approximately 20% to 22%. GAAP earnings per diluted share is expected to be approximately $0.33 per share, plus or minus $0.05. On a non-GAAP basis, excluding share-based compensation expense and intangible asset amortization expense, we expect non-GAAP earnings per diluted share will be in the range of $0.68, plus or minus $0.05, the midpoint of which represents an increase of 31% sequentially.
The guidance for the third fiscal quarter does not include any view on the foreign exchange gains or losses or a mark-to-market adjustment for our capped call and includes an income tax provision expected to be in the range of 14% to 18%. The number of shares used to estimate earnings per diluted share for the third fiscal quarter is 24.6 million. Capital expenditures for the third fiscal quarter are expected to be in the range of $4 million to $6 million.
Please refer to the non-GAAP financial information section and the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial measures to GAAP results and reconciliation of GAAP net income to adjusted EBITDA tables in our earnings press release for further details. Operator, we are now ready to take questions.
[Operator Instructions] Our first question comes from the line of Blayne Curtis with Barclays.
Obviously, the backdrop here, I think most companies are lowering numbers, you had some good results. I'm curious, kind of a couple of things on that front. One, if you can just talk about where you saw shortages, if there's any quantification on kind of how much that impact was. And then I'm kind of just curious as you're looking forward here, you kind of have 2 opposing factors. Seems like you probably would benefit from some work from home, which could be a near-term boost. But then obviously, you have a big consumer business in Brazil. And I am no expert on COVID exposures in Brazil, but I think most people assume that's going to get worse. So I was just kind of curious how you're handicapping that?
As you know, Blayne, Jack and I are in different places. So we will try to give you a coordinated response. I will start, and Jack can fill in. To come back to your question about -- let me start at the end with respect to Brazil. So Brazil has, by the way, many of the same restrictions in place today as we do in most of the United States. So in other words, we have stay-at-home restrictions as well as retail and travel are significantly limited. And so effectively, what you have is most of our staff are working from home, except for manufacturing, which is not possible to do from home. We are seeing some of our customers have slowdowns and shutdowns for temporary, maybe because they had a case of positive of COVID. And so it is an uneven environment and less predictable. But as you pointed out, some of the benefits we are seeing are from the -- particularly the PC and the server market, PC laptop server, not as much in the mobile phone market.
The mobile phone market, at least for now, we can see production levels are down, and that was, to some degree, driven by component shortages. But now I think we are going to see a different effect, which is factories are also slowing down because of shutdowns and some temporary situations at certain customers, not all customers. So it is a fluid situation. But we've been obviously looking at our backlog and what we've shipped already. And as a result, we're pretty comfortable with where we are in terms of our Q3 estimates. And obviously, we have backlog by this stage for much of what we're talking about. Barring some significant incidents, which causes us to shut down operations or something like that, we're pretty confident in our estimates.
Now to come back to the beginning of your question, which is shortages from China, which was a little earlier in the quarter, we had shortages and they rippled through all the way to the supply chain. Mostly, what we buy in China is our circuit boards and passives. But Jack, you might care to elaborate further on that.
Sure. Real quick, Blayne, to also -- some of our customers had a component shortage, if you're going that way with the question. Seems like even in Brazil, when Ajay mentioned that we didn't ship some mobile memory because of component shortages, it was our customers who couldn't get parts, not us. So the phone guys couldn't get enough parts to build phones so they shut down for a little bit during the quarter. As far as us, we didn't really have an issue of getting our parts, but we had customers who couldn't get some of their parts out of China. And then we had the Chinese contract manufacturers shut down for 5 weeks or so in the quarter. So yes, there was a minimal impact to us in the quarter, but it wasn't anything dramatic in our Q2.
And just one last one, if you could just -- the gross margin improvement into May, what's driving that?
Sure. I mean a lot of it is that Specialty Compute, which is the highest gross margin segment of the business, is going to -- projected to have a better quarter in Q3. Remember, in Q2, we talked about the governments that have got pushed. So that got pushed into Q3. And so the performance there will improve the margin somewhat in the quarter.
Our next question comes from Raji Gill with Needham & Company.
A question on the memory market. My understanding is that the lead times have kind of stretched out for memory and both for DRAM and NAND, and we're starting to see increased pricing in Flash and DRAM. Wondering if you could kind of comment on your thoughts on that dynamic that you're seeing in the market and how that's kind of bleeding into your business?
Sure. I could start and maybe Ajay can come in and finish a little bit. Yes, we're seeing -- we are definitely seeing DRAM lead time stretch out. We've seen those get out to 12, 15 weeks. We're seeing Flash, still longer, especially in caps and resistors. So we're kind of back to a situation now where customers are placing orders earlier to get their parts, which is helpful to us. And Ajay mentioned earlier we have a backlog for most of our business during the quarter. And so we're getting more backlog again from customers as they have to order farther out to make sure that they get their parts. So far, it's not hurting us from a revenue or margin standpoint. It gives a little bit better visibility.
Okay. Got it. And you talked about some of the end markets, oil and gas being weaker, offset by network storage, telecom. You kind of lumped PC and mobile together at like 34%. It seems to me that there could be some issues in mobile given the production problems. Wondering if you could kind of break out the and storage. I'm just trying to see what the -- to pinpoint the exposure.
Sure. So most of the mobile and PC, all -- pretty much all of that's in Brazil. The only place we really play in the consumer markets are in Brazil. So that's really all Brazil exposure. So it's not a worldwide kind of phenomenon there. And so there, you're probably still looking at -- 2/3 of that is probably mobile, 1/3 of that would be PCs.
Okay. And in terms of just the weakening the real. So you talked about putting FX contracts to try to minimize your AP payments. But you have not seen the impact yet on actual end demand. So I'm just wondering what would -- when would you see that? And would it be just obviously in just lower sell- through for these phones?
Yes. I mean we should see it in our -- we should see it from our customers, right? We would start getting lower forecast from the cell phone guys in Brazil, say, the Lenovo and LG that their 6 months forecast for us will start to decrease if their sell-through was going down. And so far, we haven't seen that yet in Brazil.
As you might imagine, Raji, this is a point that we're particularly focused on because we can see the effects of a 20% change in the exchange rate on the end price of the product. And to top it all off, you have significant slowdowns in retail, right? And there are quite a few phones sold through retail. So meanwhile, online is, even in Brazil, growing much faster. And so if we sound like we're not able to give you an extremely clear answer, it's because we are not in that we -- the forecasts we're getting, as recently as this week, are continuing to show pretty -- not showing any significant drop-off. I mean there's changes, but not significant. What we are seeing are the effects of factories shutting down for a week, 2 weeks because of issues with infections.
Our next question comes from Sidney Ho with Deutsche Bank.
A couple of them, I -- for the Specialty Computing business, I wonder if you can double-click on that and give us some color what portion of that business you consider as stable and what is more like GDP-driven that may get impacted in the macro environment we're in, particularly interested in your view on some of the government projects. And kind of related to that, Ajay, you talked about increasing -- you're seeing an increasing potential from the 3 acquisitions. Maybe can you get into a little more color what those potential could be.
Sure, Sidney, thank you. I'll start, and maybe Jack can add to it. The -- starting with the sectors, we have a fair amount of business, as you noted, with government and government labs and different government agencies. And we don't see any drop-off in activity there. If anything, the spending has increased, as you've noted in the press, I'm sure. We do have a fair amount of business with financial services, with -- mostly from an analytics point of view with medical, particularly analytics and trials and that business seems all right. We have a fair amount of business with social media, and that business seems pretty well all right. We have some business in that entire segment related to telecom. And so far, that's good. We have some business related to industrial, and frankly, it's a small segment, but we could see a little bit of push out in the industrial segment. And as you -- as I think I noted in my comments, we have some business related to oil and gas. And that oil and gas business, frankly, it's kind of -- I'm speculating when I say we expect it to get weaker because we have not seen it get weaker yet. But maybe that's because they're all working from home and haven't yet got to the point where they've decided to relook at their CapEx. So I'm speculating. I don't really know. I'm guessing that one would expect the oil and gas-related large installations to be weaker going forward. Much as our business today, it doesn't seem to be showing that.
And finally, we have, in our wireless computing area, some consumer-related exposure, which is actually doing extremely strongly. And then we have some enterprise related, which we are not quite sure how it's going to pan out. But when we combine all that and take into account the seasonality of that business, at least in our third quarter and from what we can see going forward, we have a pretty strong position and not a lot of weak ones.
Great. And in terms of -- you talked about this increasing potential that you're seeing from the acquisitions. Can you give us a little more color on those?
Well, those are what we're talking about in Specialty Compute. All of our acquisitions have been in that line of business, the Specialty Computing and Storage line of business. So that is what I was talking about. And one area which we acquired, Penguin Computing, high-performance computing, that's doing pretty well. Another area is Embedded Computing and there, we have a fair amount of government- related business and defense-related business, and that's doing pretty well. And then we have wireless computing, which are doing really well because that's growing very significantly with both existing customers that are growing and new customers. So hopefully, that's in line with your question.
Yes. Great. Maybe a follow-up question. I appreciate the gross margin color you guys provided in the quarterly filings. As we look forward, how do you think about the gross margin for the Specialty Computing business? I think it has improved, like at least 10 points from a year ago. Is that something you can think about a 3-handle? And then which of the 3 businesses do you expect to see the most upside potential from where they are today?
Sure, I can jump into that one. I mean the reason you've seen the big increase of Artesyn, right, when we bought Artesyn, we said that was like a 40% gross margin-type business. So the purchase of Artesyn has really bumped up the gross margins as to why you see that Specialty higher now. I think going forward, as we've been talking about, we think we can continue to improve the Penguin margins. So I think go forward, the biggest improvement in this area will be the Penguin margins, especially as we get more and more managed services in that business. I mean, Ajay talked about this quarter was our best quarter for bookings, and a lot of that was in kind of some of the managed service areas, we continue to improve that business. And if our managed services business grows, we'll continue to see the gross margins in those business grow.
Great. If I can squeeze in one more question. Go ahead. Go ahead, Jack.
Sure. No, no. And you might see a 3-handle sometime for that business in the future certainly.
Great. One last question for me. Are you -- in the guidance, are you expecting any onetime charges, whether that's in cost of goods sold or operating expenses related to logistics-related costs? Ajay, you mentioned component availability from China, operational challenges in China. Anything specific that is a onetime thing that may come off in the following quarter?
No.
Well, maybe, again, not knowing exactly what you're referring to. So the convertible debt, we had a significant number of onetime expenses related to that offering and to -- related to the extinguishing of our term debt. So you see that already in our financial statements, if that's what you mean. The other question...
Yes, I was thinking more on the operational side.
Yes. On the operational, and it's a question as to whether you would call it operational. I mean, the depreciation of the real, the Brazilian real may -- it's been a very rapid depreciation. Exactly how that's going to play through, we're still trying to figure out. Obviously, it reduces our local costs, labor and facilities and so on. But meanwhile, it means that prices in local currency are higher. How that's all going to play through? We don't know. But no, we're not anticipating any very specific onetime costs related to operations, if that's your question.
Our next question comes from Brian Chin with Stifel.
And maybe the first question, just to level set, go back to just your outlook for the May quarter, 5% sequential growth at the midpoint. Can you maybe walk us through your thinking in terms of how Brazil is going to do there relative to the guide, Specialty Memory as well as Specialty Compute?
Sure. I can kind of take it to a high level. At a high level, we would expect our Brazil business to be maybe fairly flat kind of quarter-over-quarter. We would expect both Specialty Compute and Specialty Memory to grow in Q3. And Specialty Compute will probably a little bit faster than Specialty Memory in the Q3 quarter.
Got it. Okay. That's helpful. And then maybe a couple of follow-ups. First, in terms of Specialty Memory, obviously, strong solid growth there in the February quarter, growth again for the May quarter. Yes. I know that a lot of your production, I believe, is sort of Malaysia, Southeast Asia and probably your neck of the woods, in Newark. But when those shelter-in-place measures started to become more acute sort of mid- March, if you will, early in the quarter, I'm curious, it sounds like you haven't really seen an impact on your business from a production side. I'm curious if your customers what was sort of their reaction when that happened? Was it kind of maybe to buffer up more product? Do you see a change in terms of their behavior?
I mean, I think in the Specialty Memory section, the customers were just, one, wanted to make sure that we were going to operate to support them, right, because a lot of our customers that we have in Specialty Memory are in the critical infrastructure, some in the medical and in the defense area. And so they're all critical, potential business as well they need to operate. So it's more coming to us to making sure we were going to operate, which we were, and then just wanted to make sure that we could meet their schedules that they have. And most of the products right now, as we had talked earlier, the lead times have lengthened out considerably. And so they want to make sure that we're still going to be able to ship what we've committed to for the quarter. It's mainly not -- mainly is making sure that we can ship what we are going to -- we've already committed to in the quarter during this time.
Got it. Okay. Then maybe...
Was that an helpful?
Yes, that's helpful, Jack. Yes, walking over to Brazil then. Again, it sounds like -- maybe you can help out. One, is there -- based on customers, like you said, the kind of funnel impact here of shutting down production relative to sort of the virus outbreak. Are you seeing any impact in your fiscal 3Q in terms of that? You said Brazil having kind of flattish revenue, but are you seeing any impact there in that Flash? And then secondly, on the demand side of that, to what extent have you seen the weaker real sort of customers actually adjust their product pricing, your customers in terms of them selling to the consumers out there? Has that adjustment been made? And is that maybe part of the lag here? And kind of from a timing perspective, if you did see sort of the rolling forecast revisions maybe trend down, do you have a sense on timing? Is that sort of like a mid-year or calendar year event? Or any sort of color you could provide there would be helpful.
Sure. I'll take part of that, maybe Ajay can answer a part, too. I mean as far as the customer forecast, so we have customer forecast pretty much every week -- every 2 weeks from the customers. And they're kind of constantly looking out at the future and adjusting them. So we don't wait like 6 months to get a whole new forecast of pops and things change. And so they've been slowly adjusting their forecast. But as Ajay mentioned earlier, we haven't seen any major change from our customers in Brazil yet on their forecast due to demand. Their demand seems pretty good. We've had some ups and downs, as Ajay mentioned because somebody might have shut a factory down for a week or 2, another back up and running, so there's been little blips like that but nothing from a long-term forecast.
And as I mentioned, we really haven't seen the impact of the real weaken their demand yet. And I think they've been putting through price increases on their products. They're not eating the weakness in the real. And based on our forecast, consumers must still be buying them at this -- at the higher price. The interesting fact in Brazil is that a lot of people finance products, even phones in Brazil. Even though the real has weakened a little bit, the bank for lending rate, the government lending rate is really low right now. So you have lower interest rates you've had in a long time. So that might be impacting -- it might be going the other way from a weaker real, they could finance it cheaper. So maybe their overall spend hasn't been changed that much. I don't know.
Yes. I mean, to be honest with you, I -- we totally get your question. And we've been asking exactly the same question of our team in Brazil and trying to check in with customers as well because we can see what's happening. And if prices go up by 20%, and -- wouldn't we expect that to affect demand? And so we can't assure you that it's not going to. We really -- I wish I could. But what we can tell you is that we've been checking on that. And so far, our customers are not telling us. In fact, we're asking kind of aggressively, "Are you sure your forecast is real?" because what we don't want is a repeat of an inventory buildup followed by cliff. And they assure us that they have recalculated their forecast based on the demand that they're seeing now. And based on that, these are their forecasts. So we're blessed with only so much visibility into this, and that's what we have so far.
Maybe just to wedge one more thing in relative to -- so the units could -- the forecasts still are maintained. We'll kind of see what headwinds evolve there. But in terms of the content, I think you did allude in the prepared remarks, you're seeing some content improvement maybe in terms of like MCPs or whatnot. Maybe if you can kind of comment on maybe what you might be seeing in terms of content pickup.
We've mentioned before that in Brazil, there is a system that went into place in July last year that has local content measured in points and we mentioned at the time that if you think about it from our customers' point of view, they have a significant benefit in certain commodities from the point because they can now pick and choose which commodities they want to emphasize in their purchases of local -- locally produced product. And it turns out memory provides some of the best advantages. So what you're seeing really is a flow-through of exactly that, which is that for our customers, memory provides some of the best way by which they can meet their local content requirements. And as I was also saying, as of the end of December, literally the very end of December, there's a new law in place, which went into effect April 1. So it's a law that is effective roughly a week back. And this law very clearly spells out how tax benefits will work going forward for all these companies, including for ourselves. And so as a result, customers are comfortable that they know how to operate in this environment.
For a year now -- for maybe 6 to 9 months, I should say, there was a fair amount of uncertainty, but now I think that that's cleared up. And that's helping customers to be very clear about their strategies, and therefore, they give us a longer-term view of their business. And also, it's helping them in that both the average densities are going up. I mean that's just happening across the world. Products are consuming more memory, I mean, I'm talking about smartphones. And they're giving us a greater share of the higher density product mix. So that's what we're seeing. And I think it has a lot to do with the fact that there's less, I don't know, confusion or uncertainty about what the regulations are.
Our next question comes from Suji Desilva with Roth Capital.
A lot of conversation about Brazil, but I wasn't sure if you covered it. Can you talk about why Brazil in the quarter you reported was outperformed seasonality? Were there pull-ins potentially?
No. Mostly, it was higher-density products in the mobile area. And in DRAM, PCs have been fairly strong. But clearly, higher-density product units were a little lower compared to the previous quarter as expected because you have a 2-week shutdown at Christmas and then a slowdown related to Carnival that comes in a little later. But in spite of that, we had a good quarter above our plan, particularly because of mobile product entities.
Yes. I mean, ASPs were up about 60% in the mobile area from Q1 to Q2. So they're turning back up as the densities of the products are growing again.
Got it. Okay. Then my other question is on the SSD part of the business. Is there a percent of revenue or material part of the revenue you would call out that SSD is expected to provide in the next 4 to 8 quarters to get a sense of how big you think that business could be?
When you say SSD, are you talking about Specialty Flash? Are you talking in Brazil, I guess?
No, no, no. Specialty Flash.
I mean, we've talked about that the growth engine of Specialty Memory as a whole, so I mean, that continues to grow. But we don't have a firm number to -- this is going to be half the business, 3/4 of the business. We keep getting wins. And -- but we've added a lot of big wins in the Specialty -- in the DRAM business. This was a great quarter for DRAM as well. So even though the Specialty Flash SSD business is growing with a new controller, we're getting new design wins, we had a very good quarter in NVDIMM design wins, as Ajay mentioned, and just memory design wins. So the whole business as a whole had a very good quarter and is ramping up and continues to grow, as you see in our numbers.
And our last question comes from Mark Lipacis with Jefferies.
I was on, but my line dropped, and so I apologize if the question was asked. The -- so I guess some investors that I speak with are concerned that as the virus moves around the world, that is going to impact different supply chains. And I think most people believe that China has been coming back, but some other places are starting to get hit and have been shutting down. I was wondering if there is like a -- if you could just review briefly like how your supply chain, what geographies you're most exposed to.
Sure. Do you want me to start that off, Jack?
Sure, if you want to.
Yes, Mark, the -- we have essentially 3 major manufacturing locations, and then we have a number of other smaller ones. The major ones are in Malaysia. Our main Asian center is in Malaysia. And then, of course, we have the Brazilian one, which we've talked about quite often. And finally, we have in the Bay Area 2 manufacturing facilities: one primarily focused on the high-performance computing, the large systems; and the other one, a mixture of components and boards and systems. And Malaysia was relatively unscathed in the early part of this crisis since, say, January when China was going through a particularly difficult levels of shutdowns, January and then parts of February. That has clearly improved, meaning China has improved.
Now Malaysia, meanwhile, had a number of cases, and the government got quite restrictive in terms of any gatherings of people, including for work or manufacturing. However, this has now been a very specific discussion with the Malaysian government by what is called the American Chamber of mostly technology companies. And there, as a result, an agreement that is in detail, and it details what we can do in terms of number of staff and so on and details what we can't do. And we get checked on that. So we think that, in a way, it's a good thing because we're clearly regulated, if you will. And we're operating under those regulations at less than full strength. That's already true today. Now this is a changing world, and I can't assure you that, that will be the case 2 weeks from now. But I think that the government has showed that if we take reasonable measures and make sure -- and we are really, really focused on the safety of our staff, first and foremost. We will not take a risk that puts them at in harm's way. So in Malaysia, I think we're okay.
In Brazil, we operate a factory, which is really a clean room, lots of very heavy air flow, and we've put in place a whole lot of procedures to make sure that social distancing works. And so far, we haven't had any issues. And finally, in -- we operate in Alameda County, and we've had discussions with the Alameda County health authorities and showed them exactly what we're doing. And they've been satisfied with it and have continued to let us operate as an essential business. Maybe a long answer to your question. I'm not sure if that's what you wanted.
No, it's actually what I was hoping to get. Yes, sorry, Jack, go ahead.
No problem. That's good.
So I had a follow-up, if I may. We've been doing a lot of checks in the supply chain. And I think the thing I've been most surprised about, if not shocked about, is how little that we're hearing about material order cuts. In fact, sometimes the opposite. And it's in the quarter you just reported and the outlook is a personification of that. And it seems that you might share that kind of perspective of surprise. And I guess my question is, to what extent do you think this is coming from that we just finished an inventory the fact that you guys are in the "good" end markets or versus is this something that's just going to come? I know that's an impossible answer to have -- or a question to have an answer to, but I was hoping you might share your view on that.
Is it possible, Mark, for me to ask you that question?
I'm in. I can send you my report on this.
We've been listening to your webcast too, Mark, trying to get information from you.
Yes. It's a very uncertain time. But we think there is elements of all of what you said. Meaning, first and foremost, the sectors we serve are the sectors that are actually doing almost, to a degree, being pushed forward by this crisis like, for example, the communications area, both telecommunications and enterprise communications. The other areas that we serve also seem pretty strong. So that maybe is one issue. The other might be an inventory issue, and it could be in 2 forms. It could be what you sort of suggested, which is a previous inventory lean-out that's now being filled back up or it could be a little bit of overbuying to make sure that they are not short. And we try very hard to keep an eye on that, but I can't tell you we have perfect visibility into that. So at least those 2 things are strong in our favor.
And that will conclude today's question-and-answer session. I'd like to turn the call back to Mr. Shah for closing remarks.
Thank you, operator. Well, we look forward to reporting on our progress in the coming months, it's going to be interesting. Thank you all again for joining us today. Goodbye.
Ladies and gentlemen, this concludes today's conference call. Thank you for participating. You may now disconnect.
Good afternoon, and welcome to SeaChange's Fiscal Fourth Quarter and Full Year 2020 Earnings Call for the period ended January 31, 2020. My name is Diego, and I will be your operator this afternoon.
Joining me for today's call is the company's Chief Executive Officer, Yossi Aloni; Chief Commercial Officer, Chad Hassler; and Chief Financial Officer, Michael Prinn. After the market closed today, SeaChange issued its financial results for the fiscal fourth quarter and full year 2020 in a press release, a copy of which is available in the Investors section of the company's website at investors.seachange.com.
To accompany today's call, the company has made available its prepared remarks along with a supplemental slide deck, both of which are posted in the Investors section of SeaChange's website. Management encourages you to download the slide deck if you have not already done so.
Before we begin today's call, I'd like everyone to please take a note of the safe harbor paragraph that is included at the end of today's press release. This paragraph emphasizes the major uncertainties and risks inherent in the forward-looking statements that management will be making today. As we have indicated, forward-looking statements are based on management's current expectations, and are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties that may cause actual results to differ materially from expectations. These risks and uncertainties are also outlined in the company's SEC filings, including its annual report on Form 10-K and quarterly reports on Form 10-Q. Any forward-looking statements should be considered in light of these factors.
Additionally, this presentation contains certain non-GAAP financial measures as that term is defined by the SEC in Regulation G. Non-GAAP financial measures should not be considered in isolation from, or as a substitute for, financial information presented in compliance with GAAP. Accordingly, SeaChange has provided a reconciliation of these non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable GAAP measures in the company's earnings release issued today.
I would like to remind everyone that this call is being recorded and will be made available for replay via a link available in the Investor Relations section of SeaChange's website.
Now I would like to turn the call over to SeaChange's CEO, Mr. Yossi Aloni.
Thanks, operator, and good afternoon, everyone. We are pleased to announce that the transformation of 9 months, we upgraded our Board of Directors, have a new executive team, new sales and marketing organization and a stronger and more efficient R&D organization. In 2020, we launched the final go- to-market strategy, integrating on the excellent SeaChange stand-alone products into a single-winning software solution with value-based engagement. The initial results are just great. During the last 9 months of fiscal 2020, we won more projects than SeaChange won over the past 7 years. These wins enabled us to deliver profit and growth albeit a cliff in our legacy revenues.
Overall, fiscal 2020 was a positive year for SeaChange. We achieved a total revenue of $67.2 million, of this amount, Framework engagements of 55% of our total revenue. We improved our total gross margins to 65%. In the second half of fiscal 2020, where most of our revenues came from Framework engagements, our gross margin was over 70%. We generated $4.8 million in non-GAAP operating income. We realized more than $12 million in annualized cost savings, and this is just the beginning.
We consolidated our R&D operation to a single location, increasing our efficiency and enabling additional meaningful savings for fiscal 2021. We cleaned up all our legacy customer commitments, many of which generated negative ROI. This enables additional savings for fiscal 2021.
As we exited Q4, SeaChange is a profitable, growing, lean and efficient company and well positioned to benefit from the COVID-19 impact on the media segment. As for the current operating environment with COVID-19, road map and customer support, no impact. Our CTO took all the needed actions in a timely manner. We maintained both our high-quality customer support and road map development pace.
Customer engagements, we and our customers are working from home, therefore, this is slowing some of our engagements. We continue to push forward, and we expect to continue and close business.
As for the opportunity, with the Framework being the only solution that can reduce our customers' video quality operating expenses by up to 50%, we expect to see a significant boost to our business within very few months.
TV providers are facing 2 challenges these days, an increasing in operating expenses and declining revenues. Growing demand for video increases the provider expenses. For example, many TV providers are paying more for CDN, others are increasing network support and making immediate network investments to enable servicing the growing demand. In addition, while the TV providers' operating expenses is increasing, advertising revenues and video ARPU are going down. The increasing operating expenses with declining revenues, as we enter a recession, is a perfect storm for the TV providers. Our Framework is the best tool in the industry to address these challenges.
On the cost side, using our value-based engagement, we'll reduce our customers' operating expenses to a point where the total cost of ownership to use the Framework is almost 0. We try to make it impossible for the customer to say no, while protecting our target margins. In many cases, our customers reduced the video delivery operating expenses by 50%.
On the revenue side, the Framework enables the TV providers to offer web-like advertising for both live and on-demand TV, which enable them to protect and increase some of their advertising revenues. No other vendor in the industry offers a 0 cost to own solution or make this claim. This amazing combination will enable us to scale up our business. We believe that within very few months, fiscal 2021 will be a great year for SeaChange.
Before I discuss our outlook and strategic initiatives for fiscal 2021, I'll turn the call over to our CCO, Chad, to provide details on the Framework wins. Afterwards, Michael, our CFO, will walk you through our financial performance. Chad?
Thanks, Yossi, and good afternoon, everyone. It's great to speak with you again today. We finished the fiscal year with an exceptionally strong win rate by securing 11 significant Framework deals in Q4, which was up approximately 30% over the prior quarter. The 11 Framework wins in the quarter brought the mentioned, we achieved this all in less than a year, a truly impressive feat on its own.
The 26 wins we secured reflects the increasing demand we are seeing across the industry for our versatile, cloud-based or localized video delivery solution. Framework enables content owners, service providers and broadcasters to offer a Netflix-like service for both live channels and video-on-demand, using existing cable networks and/or over-the-top. This helps these organizations stay competitive and generate new revenue streams by offering unique services and content to meet all their customers' viewing needs.
It's not just a sheer number of wins that's noteworthy, it's also the healthy mix of new and existing logos we secured during the year, including significant wins in which we successfully replaced a competing legacy solution.
From the top telecommunication companies in the U.S. to leading regional service providers globally, the common denominator is that these organizations are selecting the Framework to enhance the user experience, significantly reduce operating costs and more effectively monetize their installed base. An integral part of our success is thanks to the go-to-market strategy we implemented last April. If you had the opportunity to hear Yossi or I talk about the strategy in any detail, you'll know that it was inspired by simplicity. We started by introducing the Framework where we had truly the best components. This includes the best user interface and the best back office, and instead of being sold as stand-alone components, which is how the company previously sold, we began selling it as a fully integrated solution.
Customers were looking for a plug-and-play solution that just worked, not multiple components that they had to assemble to build a solution. While we've had great success selling Framework following this proven strategy, we're not resting on our laurels and are actively pursuing additional approaches and channels to drive greater adoption and revenue streams for SeaChange. Later this year, we plan to introduce the Framework plug-in store, which will be designed to help our customers do more with the Framework through both free and premium plug-ins, providing them with further avenues to monetize their installed base.
Additionally, the Framework technology enables us to change the way TV ads are sold, which, in turn, will allow our customers to recoup some of the ad revenue the TV industry has lost to the web over the past decade. In fact, we have several ongoing customer engagements and should be able to announce the initial customer deployments in the coming months.
Overall, we're really encouraged by the sales traction we achieved in fiscal 2020. We've entered the new year with a growing list of Framework customers, building recurring revenues through multiyear agreements, industry-leading technology, along with a robust pipeline of new opportunities that is well distributed across our geographic regions. We're confident these factors have positioned us well for continued success in fiscal 2021 and beyond.
With that, I'll turn the call over to Mike to walk us through our financial performance for fiscal Q4 and the full year of 2020. Mike?
Thanks, Chad, and good afternoon, everyone. Turning to our financial results for the fourth quarter ended January 31, 2020. We entered the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020 with $22.2 million in total backlog, excluding maintenance and legacy support. We booked new business of $17.4 million during the fourth quarter and ended the quarter with backlog of $21.8 million.
Total revenue increased 14% to $19.3 million from $17 million in the same year ago period. The increase in total revenue was driven by a $13 million increase in Framework revenue compared to no Framework revenue in the same year ago period, offset by a $10.7 million decrease in legacy revenue.
Product revenue increased 69% to $13.2 million or 69% of total revenue from $7.8 million or 46% of revenue in the same year ago period. The increase in product revenue was driven by a $12.4 million increase in Framework revenue.
Service revenue decreased 33% to $6.1 million or 31% of total revenue from $9.1 million or 54% of total revenue in the same year ago period. The decrease in service revenue was due to lower revenue from both professional services and support revenue from customers related to our legacy products. As we mentioned in our Q3 call, these declines are consistent with our expectations as we transitioned legacy customers to new Framework arrangements and transitioned our professional services organization to our customer engineering organization as we completed legacy professional services projects.
Revenue from our international markets was $11 million or 57% of total revenue, which compares to $12.4 million or 73% of total revenue in the same year ago period. The decrease in international revenue was due to a large project for a significant international customer in the fourth quarter of last year. Revenue in our U.S. market was $8.2 million or 43% of total revenue, which was up from $4.6 million or 27% of total revenue in the same year ago period. The increase in revenue from the U.S. was due to our Framework offering being introduced in fiscal 2020.
In terms of customer concentration, we had 2 customers that accounted for 16% and 12% of our total revenue compared to 1 customer in Q4 of last year that accounted for 42% of our total revenue.
Looking at our margins. Gross profit increased $14 million or 73% of total revenue from $10.9 million or 64% of total revenue in the same year ago period. The increase in gross profit was due to a shift in sales to our Framework product starting in Q2 of fiscal 2020. 73% gross margin we achieved in the quarter exceeded our annual guidance target of 60% for the fiscal year.
Product gross margin was 87% compared to 88% in Q4 of last year. Service gross margin was 42% compared to 43% in Q4 of last year.
Looking at our expenses, non-GAAP operating expenses decreased 25% to $9.2 million from $12.3 million in Q4 of last year. The improvement reflects the continued cost savings initiatives related to the reduction of third-party costs and elimination of nonessential internal costs throughout the organization.
In Q4, we eliminated all resources related to legacy professional services and support arrangements as we completed the remaining legacy projects we had underway. Our success reducing OpEx enabled us to realize 3 consecutive quarters of non-GAAP operating income as well as 3 consecutive quarters of non- GAAP net income.
GAAP income from operations totaled $3.6 million, an improvement from a loss of $19.9 million in the same year ago period. As a percent of total revenue, GAAP income from operations for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020 was 19%, which compares to a negative percentage in the year ago period.
Non-GAAP income from operations totaled $4.8 million or $0.13 per diluted share, an improvement from a loss of $1.2 million or $0.03 per basic share in the same year ago period. As a percentage of total revenue, non-GAAP income from operations was 25% compared to negative 7% in Q4 of last year. GAAP net loss totaled $43,000 or $0.00 per basic share, a significant improvement from a loss of $19.6 million or $0.55 per basic share in the same year ago period. Non-GAAP net income totaled $1.2 million or $0.03 per diluted share. This was an improvement from a loss of $946,000 or $0.03 per basic share in Q4 of last year. As a percentage of total revenue, non-GAAP net income was 6% compared to negative 6% in Q4 of last year.
Turning to the balance sheet, we ended the year with $13.9 million in cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities and had no debt. Our cash position was up $159,000 from prior quarter, so we're pleased with that progress for the quarter as in prior quarters and prior years, we've had significant cash burn.
Deferred revenue at quarter end was $6.2 million, which compares to $7.8 million at the end of the prior quarter and $10.7 million at the end of Q4 last year. The sequential and year-over-year decrease was primarily due to the decrease in legacy revenue and the timing of revenue recognized and renewal of post- warranty maintenance and support agreements during the quarter.
DSO excluding unbilled receivables, was 66 days at the end of the fourth quarter of this fiscal year which compares to $16.7 million in the prior quarter and $5.4 million in Q4 of last year. The sequential and year-over-year increase was the result of the timing of billings from our Framework deals due to the payment terms on those deals compared to the revenue recognition for the Framework deals.
Now turning to our fiscal year 2020 results. Total revenue increased 8% to $67.2 million from $62.4 million in fiscal 2019. The increase in total revenue was driven by a $36.8 million increase in Framework revenue compared to no Framework revenue in fiscal 2019, offset by a 51% decrease in legacy revenue to $30.4 million compared to $62.4 million in fiscal 2019. We fell slightly short of the lower end of our guidance range primarily because of a few Framework deals that pushed out of the quarter.
Looking at our revenue buckets, product revenue increased 93% to $39.9 million or 59% of total revenue from $20.7 million or 33% of total revenue in fiscal 2019. The increase in product revenue was driven by an $18.3 million increase in Framework revenue. Service revenue decreased 35% to $27.2 million or 41% of total revenue from $41.7 million or 67% of total revenue in fiscal 2019. The decrease in service revenue was driven by a $6.1 million decrease in installation and customized development services as a result of our Framework product's out-of-the-box functionality as well as a $7 million decrease in maintenance associated with decommissioned legacy products.
Revenue from our international markets was $35.4 million or 53% of total revenue, which compares to $38.8 million or 62% of total revenue in fiscal 2019. Revenue in our U.S. market was $31.7 million or 47% of total revenue, which was up from $23.6 million or 38% of total revenue in fiscal 2019.
In terms of customer concentration, we had no customers accounting for more than 10% each of our total revenue in the fiscal year compared to 2 customers who represented 24% and 11% each in fiscal 2019.
Looking at our margins, gross profit increased to $43.5 million or 65% of total revenue from $37.3 million or 60% of total revenue in fiscal 2019. As I mentioned earlier, the increase in gross profit was due to a new go-to-market strategy of our Framework product starting in Q2 of fiscal 2020. The 65% gross margin we achieved exceeded our annual guidance target of 60% for the fiscal year.
Product gross margin was 85% compared to 83% in fiscal 2019. The improvement was due to an increase in higher-margin Framework revenue in fiscal 2020. Service gross margin was 36% compared to 48% in fiscal 2019. The decline was due to fixed costs related to decommissioning of our legacy products in fiscal 2020.
Looking at our expenses, non-GAAP operating expenses decreased 20% or $9.8 million to $40 million from $49.7 million in fiscal 2019. As I mentioned earlier, the improvement reflects the continued cost savings initiatives related to the reduction of third-party costs and elimination of nonessential internal costs throughout the organization.
Turning to our profitability measures, GAAP loss from operations totaled $3.5 million, a significant improvement from a loss of $35.8 million in fiscal 2019. Non-GAAP income from operations totaled $3.6 million or $0.10 per diluted share, an improvement from a loss of $11.7 million or $0.33 per basic share in fiscal 2019. As a percentage of total revenue, non-GAAP income from operations was 5%, which compares to a negative percentage in fiscal 2019.
GAAP net loss for the year totaled $8.9 million or $0.24 per basic share, a significant improvement from a loss of $38 million or $1.06 per basic share in fiscal 2019. Included in the net loss for fiscal 2020 was a onetime noncash charge of $5.4 million related to the loss on the sale of our prior headquarters in Acton.
And finally, non-GAAP net loss improved by $12 million to a loss of $1.9 million or $0.05 per basic share from a loss of $13.9 million or $0.39 per basic share in fiscal 2019.
Before I hand the call over to Yossi, I wanted to discuss guidance for our fiscal 2021. Prior to the onset of COVID-19, we were prepared to provide guidance representing meaningful revenue growth in fiscal 2021. Based on our pipeline, we believed revenue guidance of $80 million to $90 million for fiscal 2021, with operating metrics consistent with our previous guidance was achievable. We're working to better understand the impact of COVID-19 and will provide our formal fiscal 2021 guidance as COVID's impact on our business becomes clearer.
This completes my financial summary. For a more detailed analysis of our financial results, please refer to today's earnings release as well as our 10-K, which we plan to file by April 15. Yossi?
Thanks, Mike. We started fiscal 2021 with positive momentum and the best pipeline we have ever had. As Mike mentioned, prior to COVID-19, we planned to guide for $80 million to $90 million for fiscal 2021. We expect to better understand the short-term COVID-19 impact during the next 90 days. We believe that we have the right cost structure to endure the next few months and later to prevail using our value- based engagement and unique value proposition. There is one final item I'd like to mention. Recently, we had a new module to the Framework, which will change the way the TV industry unsold and underutilized advertising inventory is monetized. We are currently working with several customers and will share more in the near future. With that, let me turn the call over to the operator to begin the Q&A. Operator?
[Operator Instructions] Our first question comes from Steven Frankel with Dougherty.
So Yossi, you talked about several deals that you hoped to close in Q4 that slipped out. I wonder if you might tell us approximately how many deals slipped out of the quarter? What was their value? And have any of those deals closed thus far in Q1?
Thanks, Steve. So these are 4 deals from the international market. We did not lose any of them. We expect to close all of them. Closing the 4 deals would have enabled us to significantly exceed our revenue target. Unfortunately, we were not able to complete the agreement in a timely manner. It's also important to note, if you don't mind, that our win ratio, including these 4 deals that we consider not out of the win ratio, our win ratio for last year was quite decent. It was over 75%, out of which 4 deals were pushed out. We did not lose them, and we are also starting with a positive momentum. So overall, we are still very bullish on the future of our company.
Okay. And let's talk about solving the cash problem. Yes, you did generate some cash in Q4, but it was a relatively minor amount. I assume your internal plan was for something higher than that. What kind of cash burn might we expect in the next couple of quarters until business picks up?
Yes, it's Mike. I can take that. So during the first 3 quarters of the year, we did burn $17 million. We had kind of a, call it, cash neutral or we generated a little bit of cash in Q4. Granted, it was a small increase, but I think it was significant in comparison to the cash burn in prior quarters and prior years. 2020 was a transition year for us. So we're focused on optimizing our cost structure, building a business that's consistently generating cash. And then I think just in terms of stability, we've got an accounts receivable and an unbilled base. And if we ever, at some point in the future, decided we wanted to put something in place, I think that would be kind of a logical next step.
But you will burn material cash in the next couple of quarters, right? That's just your business cycle that's been the company's history? Or is there something different that says if business recovers in Q2, you'd generate cash?
So Mike, before you answer that, Steve, there's one more item that you need to look at. You will see the updated OpEx. The challenge we had last year, we had some negative commitments, very meaningful in terms of OpEx. The impact of these legacy commitments was both on the support organization and the R&D organization. Now that all of these legacy commitments are done and completed with negative ROI, obviously, in Q1, our cost structure is much better, therefore, it will have a significant impact on the cash that we need. But Mike, please go ahead.
No, I think that makes sense. I think the only thing I'll just add is, yes, we may see a little bit of a cash burn, especially maybe quarter-to-quarter. We'll give maybe some longer-term outlook when we give additional guidance. But I think like I mentioned, the -- compared to kind of legacy SeaChange, we don't expect that type of significant burn in 2021.
Okay. And just a follow-up on a press release you had, maybe it was last week, where you talked about the increase in streaming, and I understand that's obviously what's going on in the market. But is there any component of Framework today where you derive incremental revenue as customer activity increases?
It's limited to new components. For instance, when customer activity is increasing, many of our Framework customers, obviously, they will require some more cloud services, where we have decent gross margin, and some of them will require better analytics as well. This will be positive. Also and this is fairly new in places where we are going to take over the advertisement, obviously, over there, there will be meaningful increase.
Okay. So these are things that potentially can come into play in the -- over the next year. Where is the head count today? And given the COVID-19 situation, are you contemplating further shrinking head count?
Yes. So right now, we're at about 275 globally. We have made some changes. And I think we just are going to continue to evaluate it on a kind of a monthly and a quarterly basis. I feel like we made a lot of changes at the end of our fiscal '20, in Q3 and Q4. And so we kind of feel like we are lean and efficient and can leverage that, and we'll continue to monitor that going forward.
Okay. And then a big-picture question. If you've done 26 Framework deals, remind us how large your customers could you convert?
So the legacy installed base, it's about 120 customers. It's important to note that many, many, many of the Framework wins are from new customers and new functionality. If you are looking at our target market, so obviously we are not only servicing the legacy customers that SeaChange used to service. It's not only a cable solution. The vast majority of the Framework customers are OTT solution. Now when you think about the OTT domain, so -- of course, cable providers are there, and we will continue to service them and do our best to support them, but we also have content providers and content owners. And if you think about content owners, for instance, I'm not suggesting that Bloomberg is a customer but Bloomberg is a content owner, and Bloomberg, and this is public information, Bloomberg is starting an over-the-top direct-to-consumer service. This is not to be confused with the Bloomberg channel. So this is another type of content provider.
So if you think about it, the target customers that we are facing, especially these days, so it's a growing TAM and it's a significantly growing TAM. So in this sense, there's a very meaningful opportunity to do much more. And just look at the pipeline that we have going into Q1, and pipeline means that there is an opportunity, there is budget, and we are the front-runner, that's what we call a pipeline. It's the best pipeline we have ever had, hundreds of millions. So are we going to close it all this year? No. But we don't give an estimate to meet 50% of our win ratio for this year to meet our target for the year. So we feel confident. Is the next few months or next few weeks are going to be challenging? Maybe, we continue to engage. We'll see. Is this year going to be great? Yes.
Okay. And then maybe you hinted at some OpEx expense savings in Q1. Maybe give us an idea of what kind of year-over-year decline in OpEx we might see in Q1?
Yes. So our non-GAAP operating expenses were $9.2 million for Q4. And I think we're generally going to be around that run rate for the next couple of quarters or for fiscal '21. And that's obviously significantly better than in prior quarters, prior years.
[Operator Instructions] Our next question comes from Jaeson Schmidt with Lake Street.
Fully recognizing sort of the COVID-19 situation makes it a bit difficult. Just curious if you could comment on your confidence that customer spending is more being pushed and not being reduced at this time.
So Jaeson, thanks for the question. Some customers are going to push their budget, absolutely. But look at the bright side. Almost each and every TV provider on the climate, this is just like 2008, they will have to optimize their OpEx. Who else is going to offer them a solution that will enable them to reduce their OpEx by up to 50%. There's no one. Look at all the other vendors, there are not too many of them, but the other vendors that are selling multiple components for video delivery platform. They have a very long and complex price list, which has nothing to do with the operator needs and the operator OpEx challenges. And we are there. We have value-based engagement, it's unique.
So are we going to see some customers that are going to delay their budget? Yes, sure. Are we going to going to see more of those. I think it's fair to say that we already see some of those or many of those.
Okay. That's helpful. And I know you mentioned a pretty impressive win rate. But just curious, what tends to be the primary pushback from customers today with not going with the Framework deal?
So we reported 26 wins. And I said that our win rate was over 75%, also may be slightly more than that. So we lost very, very few opportunities. In the 25% that we did not win, I'm also including 4 deals that were pushed to this year. So we lost very, very few opportunities. It's hard to say. We lost so few, so -- and each one has its own reason for losing it. And losing is not only to another vendor, in some cases, losing, it means that we initiated engagement, and we were not able to convince the customer to close the engagement within the year.
And then just a quick question on the Framework plug-in store. Is this really targeted at a different segment of the market? Or is this viewed more as additive for a customer that already has gone with a more kind of broad-based Framework deal?
So if you think about the Framework, the best analogy probably is a phone. So SeaChange used to have all these gauge components like a CPU, a power button, a volume button, we took all these components, and now we are selling the best-in-class phone. Each and everyone that has this phone will have access to the App Store, to the plug-ins. But this is something that is going to be meaningful to each and every Framework customer. And within 9 months, we were able to win 26 customers, deliver the vast majority, to vast fast majority of them. I think we should be able to win a more meaningful number this year. And then once this decent number of Framework customers will have access to the Framework app store, the plug-ins, if you will, we will see some revenue contribution over there as well.
Our next question comes from George Marema with Pareto Ventures.
So on the -- can you illuminate a little bit on the 120 legacy installed base? What sort of revenue opportunities in fiscal 2021 does that represent to us?
So we can convert some of this installed base into Framework. So the 120, these are customers that are using a SeaChange component. They are not using the Framework. The vast majority of them are using one single component, with many other components from several vendors. In terms of value, probably the average value of this -- of the current installed base, the average Framework value is about $2 million to $4 million. Obviously, these are the vast majority of them, these are cable providers. So the pace over there is slightly slower. But with the COVID-19 impact on the market and the cable segment, we should be able to be in a position where maybe in the second half of the year, we are going to be able to convert many of them to the Framework.
If you think about cable providers, similar to 2008 or even worse, in fact, since they have to make investments in the networks, even the smallest operators, to continue and support the growing demand down. We already see this report, video ARPU is going down. So we have our back office install that to many cable providers. So we see this as also what they share with us. And you will see that in a public manner, probably in a month or so when they will publish their reports. So their OpEx is increasing, their revenues are decreasing, we should be able to accelerate the conversion of some of the installed base into Framework.
Okay. And then you -- is it true that, although maybe some people are sort of freezing their budget for the moment, for the next few weeks, to see what happens? Aren't some people in video accelerating their plans due to the necessity to go online immediately due to the -- like movie theaters and other content providers need to rush to market? Are you seeing some -- on the other side of the table, increased engagement from certain parties?
Oh, yes. Sure. Absolutely. You see more demand from content owners. Some content owners, like the one you mentioned, obviously, they are looking to move very, very quick. And the fact that we have a solution, running on AWS, obviously enable us to go to production fairly quickly. For instance, there's a customer in the Nordics that we were able to take the production with hundreds of thousands of subscribers within very, very few months. So we see more demand. And I believe that we have the right solution to support this demand.
Okay. Are you noticing any trends among regions like is Europe stronger or weaker, North America stronger or weaker, Latin America stronger, weaker in Q1 here right now? Any geography trends?
Yes. So we have -- in terms of opportunity size, I think it's fair to say that what we have today going into Q1, and obviously this is a pipeline that we built last year, the deals that we see today are significantly, significantly higher than everything that we have managed to close last year. And obviously, the larger deals require a longer engagement cycle, but now we are getting there.
In terms of new demand, most of the new demand is in the Americas where some content providers, content owners are faster to react. Europe, overall, is a more conservative market, so it's moving slightly slower over there in terms of new demand, not current demand.
Now if you think about the Framework, it's been out only for less than 9 months. So we started to offer the Framework for less than 9 months for last year. We started to offer the Framework, we introduced the Framework at NAB of last year, this was in April. And then we started to deliver within 60 days or so after the introduction of the Framework. So overall, the success is quite good. And the fact that we have this great, this amazing pipeline, it's because of 2 reasons, because of the fact that we have the right technology and obviously customers acknowledge that, and also the value-based engagement, which enable us, especially during this -- these days, to take new content providers in a way that will enable them to launch a service with cost control and current TV providers in a way that will enable them to control their OpEx.
Okay. And are you guys still expecting somewhere in the ballpark of a similar service revenue per quarter the next couple of quarters for the 2021?
So we will... sorry, go ahead, Mike.
Yes. So obviously, the service revenue was a big piece of legacy SeaChange. We will definitely see a decline in that in the next couple of quarters. So service revenue for Q4 was $6 million. We still have probably maybe $5 million to $10 million in total of legacy revenue to transition through the year, but you will see a decline in the services, and then that will be offset with an increase in product revenue, which is primarily what the Framework revenue is.
And when you sell a Framework deal, is there any service component that gets bled through with all components?
Yes. There is and so -- no, there is a component. So roughly, it's maybe, say, 2/3, 1/3. So if it's a $3 million deal, it's generally 2 pieces. It's $2 million of a software license and then the remaining $1 million is a services and support agreement, and that's generally over the term of the contracts, which are generally 4 to 5 years. So that other $1 million would come in ratably. And so -- and you can see this in our tables in the press release. We are starting to build up a piece of the Framework that is recurring. But obviously, given that mix, 2/3, 1/3, with 1/3 being spread over the life, you're seeing that build but it's at a smaller scale right now.
And on the Framework, is it earned monthly, quarterly or annually payments? How is the cash flow, those revenues in the out years?
So the model, typically, there's revenue recognition and there's cash. So revenue, I think we went through the 2 pieces, right, with a license when we deliver it and then ratable. Generally, the first kind of 26 deals or so that we sold with the new go-to-market, we've been spreading the payment terms out ratably. So in that same $3 million deal, where we just walk through where our revenue comes in, from a billing perspective, that will be ratable over the 4 to 5 years.
And you bill once a year or once a quarter or once a what?
Sorry. They're generally once a year or once a quarter. The most part, I'd say, majority is annually. Yes. So there'd be 1/5 kind of when they sign a contract and then...
So on a $5 million deal over 5 years, you get $1 million year 1; $1 million year 2, all of this. So if you've build it April 1 of 2019, it'd be $1 million April 1, 2019; $1 million April 1, 2020; $1 million April 1, 2021. Is that how they go?
Correct, yes.
There are no further questions at this time. I'll turn the floor back to Mr. Yossi Aloni for closing remarks. Thank you.
Thank you, everyone, for joining us today for the SeaChange fourth quarter fiscal 2020 conference. You may now disconnect.
Thank you. This concludes today's conference. All parties may disconnect. Have a great evening.
Good afternoon, everyone. On behalf of Simulations Plus, I welcome you to our second quarter fiscal year 2020 financial results conference call and webinar. Hosting the call today is Simulations Plus' CEO, Shawn O'Connor; and the company's CFO, John Kneisel. Our quarterly earnings release should be available momentarily and expect to have this before we get into the main details of the earnings call today. An opportunity to ask questions will follow today's presentation. [Operator Instructions]
Before beginning, I'd like to remind everyone that with the exception of historical information, the matters discussed in this presentation are forward-looking statements that involve a number of risks and uncertainties. The actual results of the company could differ significantly from those statements.
Factors that can cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, continued demand for the company's products, competitive factors, the company's ability to finance future growth, the company's ability to produce and market new products in a timely fashion, the company's ability to continue to attract and retain skilled personnel and the company's ability to sustain or improve the current levels of productivity.
Further information on the company's risk factors is contained in the company's quarterly annual reports and filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
With that said, I'd like to turn the call over to CEO, Shawn O'Connor. Shawn?
Thank you, Cameron. This was certainly an eventful and historical quarter for Simulations Plus and for all of us.
I'd like to start the call by expressing my hope that you and your families are all healthy and safe in these uncertain times. While we all may be feeling a bit homebound at this point, I encourage everyone to adhere to the guidelines and precautions that keep you and your families best protected during these times. Thankfully, the impact of the COVID pandemic on us here at Simulations Plus has been relatively minimal to date.
I will elaborate on the COVID impact in our response later in the call. But first, I'd like to comment with regard to our recently announced acquisition and operating results for the quarter. Subsequent to the end of the quarter, we acquired Lixoft of the Paris, France, the developer of the highly regarded Monolix
Suite. Monolix is a PK/PD modeling platform that supports the pharmacometricians workflow with data exploration, to model fitting through to clinical trial stimulation. This acquisition did several things for us. First, it immediately expands our presence in Europe with 12 new employees and strong experienced executive management.
Second, it rebalances our mix of software and consulting revenues, following 2 acquisitions of businesses that are more weighted to consulting. Lixoft's revenues are 99% annual software licenses with consistently high renewal rates, which we believe will benefit from our sales and marketing channels. Third, Lixoft has historically turned away consulting opportunities, and we believe that we will be able to respond to this market opportunity with our consulting resources, creating a new source of revenue.
And finally, the acquisition is immediately accretive with revenue growth performance in our target of 15% to 20% revenue growth and operating and EBITDA margins that exceed our existing performance. I welcome Jrme Kalifa, Lixoft's Cofounder and Chairman; and Jonathan Chauvin, Lixoft's Chief Executive Officer to our executive management team, and I also welcome the whole Lixoft team to the Simulations Plus family.
With regard to our operating results, Simulations Plus delivered another strong quarter of execution. As you may recall, our stated goal was to deliver organic revenue growth of 15% to 20%. And once again, we exceeded this goal with 22% growth. This was our third consecutive quarter with revenue growth in excess of 20%. Our software revenues grew 12%, in line with prior periods. These strong results were achieved despite lower-than-anticipated new license business from our Asian distributors, where COVID impact was first being felt in February. Specifically, we saw about $200,000 to $300,000 of new business in Asia slipped out of the second quarter, more with regard to COVID dilemma.
Our service revenue growth was strong across each of our divisions coming in overall at 35% growth. The Lancaster team is busy with many collaborations we have announced over the past several months. Cognigen is operating at capacity with full backlog, and DILIsym grew this quarter at 45%, down from their 89% growth in the first quarter, but still excellent and more in line with our capacity. Our gross margins improved to 74% overall, benefiting from a seasonally higher software quarter.
Our mix was 52% software with margins of 85% and 48% consultant with margins of 63%. Net income to EBITDA as a percentage of revenue were generally within historical levels, but impacted by onetime transaction expenses related to the Lixoft acquisition. John will speak to these in detail later in the call. Let me now speak in more detail to the impact of COVID on our business.
Operationally, about 40% of our workforce already worked remotely, and nearly everyone was equipped to do so. As a result, the transition to 100% working from home has gone quite smoothly. Indeed, our entire workforce is now working remotely, and productivity is essentially unchanged. Our industry has seen the cancellation of most conferences. We are conducting trainings and workshops virtually, and we have transitioned sales activities from face-to-face meetings to virtual meetings. We even completed an acquisition this quarter remotely. I believe and early results reinforce that Simulations Plus is well positioned to weather this storm compared to other companies.
We have a strong balance sheet with ample cash, we've generated years of consistent profitability, and we exercise prudent expense management. Even after the use of cash to complete the Lixoft acquisition, our cash position of approximately $8 million is adequate and exceeds our cash position subsequent to our 2 previous acquisitions.
We recently secured a line of credit, not out of cash flow concerns, but rather as a minimal cost insurance policy. Rates for such facilities are excellent, cost to put them in place is minimal, and there is no fee related to unused credit during the term of the line of credit. The line of credit serves as an insurance should the need arise in the future. Additionally, a significant portion of our revenues comes from the renewal of software on annual licenses with very high renewal rates. Lixoft operates on a similar model with renewal rates that are very similar to ours. So the acquisition further bolsters our recurring revenue.
We have seen no impact to date on renewal rates. Finally, our service business operates off a large undertaken a detailed review combined with ongoing interactions with our clients and have identified less than 10% of the backlog at risk of delay or cancellation at this time, but we continue to monitor this status.
Where we have seen impact is in the securing of new business at historical rates. I previously mentioned that we saw $200,000 to $300,000 in new software licenses -- excuse me, in Asia, slipped out into the second quarter. Asia continues to be impacted, where in some regions, infrastructure for work at home is not as robust as our experience here in the States. That said, this important -- this impact on new license sales is felt not just in Asia, but in all geographies. Thus far, we've seen no measurable decrease in demand, however, buying decisions are being delayed as companies wait for clarity into the economic impact of the pandemic, changes to their development plans and investments, and visibility into when the stay-at-home situations will begin to abate. We continue to close new software license business but at slower than historical pace. As a result, our new software pipeline is growing.
With regard to our service business, we also see a slowdown in closure of new business. As you know, our work with clients is sometimes in support of new clinical trials or post analysis of clinical trial performance, which in today's environment has been stalled. The direct development industry has focused its attention on COVID-related programs, is managing the disruptive impact on currently active clinical trials and evaluating existing plans for future clinical trials and programs in general.
Further, lab facilities integral to testing have been disrupted, impacting the generation of data available for analysis. All without certainty as to when the work environment will return to normal. New business discussions continue, but at a slow and cautious pace. We continue to close new service business but at a pace behind historical levels. Similar to our software business, our new business pipeline is growing.
On a positive note, we have recently initiated 2 new service offerings, which add to our new service opportunities. First, a global regulatory strategies offering, StrategiesPlus, led by a significant new addition to the team from the FDA. And secondly, the StrategiesPlus COVID ACT Program to speed consulting assistance to any organization involved in the coronavirus research.
As part of this initiative, each division of Simulations Plus has identified COVID-related product applications and services to provide specialized expertise, which will contribute to developing safe and effective treatments. These 2 new service offerings and the addition of the Lixoft software revenue stream, and the potential for Monolix-based consulting service agreements, all represent incremental revenue opportunities introduced in the last quarter. All positives for the future. Nonetheless, the near- term is dependent upon the uncertainties of the COVID impact in terms of the timing and nature of our clients' go-forward plans.
In summary, our business is faring better than most in today's COVID environment. We are strong financially, able to continue our support of clients with minimal impact and enjoy high recurring software revenue -- renewal revenues and a good backlog of service business. The current environment, for which there is no easy means to estimate when will we return to normal, is impacting new business cycles that have been mostly deferred and not lost.
Before I turn the call over to John, let me speak briefly about the performance of our division. At our Lancaster division, revenue was up 18% for the quarter. Breaking this down, our revenue from -- came 71% from renewals, 16% from new sales and 13% from consulting services.
In our software business, renewals were 88% by account and 94% based on fees, and we have generated 11% year-over-year growth in new licensing units. We added 12 new commercial companies, including new licenses in the U.S., Europe, Japan and Brazil. And we also expanded our presence with nonprofits, research groups, academic institutions, and regulatory agencies.
We are engaged in projects with 19 companies and 10 funded collaborations. Operationally, we continue to advance our industry-leading software. As previously referred to, we welcome on board, Sandra Suarez- Sharp as Vice President of Regulatory Affairs. Sandra comes to us after a 10-year career at the FDA, where she was most recently master reviewer and scientific adviser for the division of Biopharmaceutics. We ended the quarter with 44 full-time employees at our Lancaster division, up 3 from 41 in the prior quarter and up 6 from 38 last year.
At our Buffalo division, revenue was up 20% for the quarter. We signed 21 contracts and initiated 14 new projects during the quarter. Overall, we have 64 active projects across 34 companies, we have 18 proposals outstanding with 18 companies as of March 1. We also continue to expand and improve our team. We recruited a Director, Quantitative Clinical Pharmacology to focus on traditional pharmacology consulting support, and we hired a senior clinical pharmacologist to increase capacity to support early- stage clinical development, advice and services.
We ended the quarter with 52 full-time employees at our Buffalo division, up 1 from 51 in the prior quarter and up 10 from 42 last year. Our DILIsym or RTP division, revenue increased 45% for the quarter. Breaking this down, 48% of total division revenue was from DILIsym software and projects, 12% from RENAsym, 10% from IPF system -- excuse me, software, 12% from NAFLDsym software and projects, 6% from RENAsym grant and 12% from our heart failure project.
DILIsym has 20 active consulting projects and 7 active consortium of contracts at this time. We ended the quarter with 18 full-time employees at our RTP division, up 1 from 17 in the prior quarter and up 1 from 17 last year. I'll take a breath, and let me now turn the call over to John to review more detailed financial results. John?
Thanks a lot, Shawn. Looking at the quarter here. First, our consolidated net revenues for the second quarter of our fiscal year '20, were up 22% or $1.9 million to $10.3 million compared to $8.5 million in the prior year. Total gross profit increased 23% to $7.7 million, representing a 74.2% gross margin in the second quarter of this fiscal year compared to a 73.9% margin in the same quarter last year. SG&A expenses were $4.1 million or 40% of revenue in the second quarter of this year, an increase of approximately $1.3 million or 46% compared to $2.8 million or 33% of revenue in the second quarter of '19.
The increase in SG&A expenses was primarily the result of increases in salaries, wages, labor and stock compensation costs, as the company has grown in headcount to support our revenue growth. We have also seen increases in selling expenses, commissions and advertising, some contract labor also. In addition, this quarter, we incurred about $300,000 of M&A-related due diligence costs associated with the Lixoft acquisition. Without these transactions-related cost, the SG&A would have been approximately 37% of revenue.
SG&A expense in the third quarter will be -- also be impacted by transaction costs associated with the Lixoft acquisition. Research and development costs for the most recent fiscal quarter were approximately $1.4 million. Of this total, $748,000 was expensed and $620,000 was capitalized.
Income from operations for the second quarter of the year was $2.8 million, up approximately $96,000 or 3.5% compared to $2.7 million in the year ago quarter. Our provision for income taxes in the second quarter of fiscal year '20 was about $686,000, an effective rate of 24.2% compared to an effective rate of 22.1% in the prior year. We expect our tax rate to be in the 23% to 25% range for this fiscal year.
Net income increased by approximately 2.4% or $51,000 to $2.2 million in the most recent quarter compared to $2.1 million a year ago. On a per share basis, net income was $0.12 per diluted share in the second quarter of both this fiscal year and last fiscal year. The transaction expenses lowered EPS by just over $0.01 per share.
EBITDA was $3.5 million this quarter, up slightly compared to $3.4 million in the year ago quarter.
Now going on to the year-to-date numbers. Consolidated net revenues year-to-date were up 23.4% or $3.7 million to $19.8 million compared to $16 million in the year ago. Our gross margin for the first 6 months was 73.1% compared to 72.5%. SG&A expenses, including the $300,000 of transaction-related costs were $7.6 million or 38.6% of revenue compared to 34.5% for the same period last year. Expense, effectively unchanged from the prior period -- or the prior year, excuse me. Income from operations for the period was $5.5 million compared to $4.8 million, and net income increased by approximately $600,000 or about 16% to $4.2 million compared to $3.6 million. EBITDA was $6.8 million year-to-date, up 10.5% compared to $6.2 million the prior year.
Turning to the next slide. This slide shows our revenue on a quarterly basis from fiscal year 2016 to the second quarter of 2020, illustrating both historical quarterly growth patterns and the seasonality of the business. Seasonality can best be seen using the 2019 purple bars. Our third quarter is typically our strongest quarter with a decrease in revenue in the fourth quarter that coincides with the slowdown in our clients' purchasing in the summer months. Our first and second quarters this year followed the same upward trend.
The next slide represents income by quarter, which illustrates a consistent track record of increases both year-over-year and sequentially through the first and third quarters with the fourth quarter, as we talked, a little bit lighter for the year. As you can see, the patterns for quarterly revenues and quarterly income from operations have largely held true for quite a number of years. This Slide 15, we can see that similar pattern of net income with the third quarter typically being the strongest. We isolated the impact of a $1.5 million deferred tax benefit in the second quarter of fiscal year '18 since it tends to skew the presentation without highlighting that difference.
On the next slide, diluted earnings per share follows the same pattern and tracks with net income as expected. As I mentioned earlier, fiscal year '20 second quarter diluted earnings per share were $0.12, excluding the $300,000 of transaction costs related to Lixoft, as I indicated before, earnings would have been a $0.01 more.
Turning to EBITDA. Again, we expected the seasonal patterns to hold true with the overall trends moving upward and typically seasonal -- with typical seasonality between the quarters. Just a note here regarding the trends in these slides. Shawn has covered what we currently see related to COVID-19, after what is effectively only 1 month into the pandemics effect. No one is able to fully predict the full impact. But based on our annual renewal model for software revenues, we'd expect the seasonal nature of these trends to continue. We will be continually monitoring for changes.
This slide shows our revenue by region. We are a global business with the majority of our revenues in the Western Hemisphere, approximately 68% of revenues were in the Americas. Asia and Europe each represents 16% of the total revenue for our current year.
Moving on to our cash position slide. This slide shows the strength of our cash position with a quarterly view of our cash balance and how we have used funds for dividends and acquisitions over the period. Observing the red balance line, we can see that the low point of cash or at the time when the company has invested in new acquisitions. The company shows patterns of cash accumulation post major acquisition dates. Beginning with the first quarter of fiscal year '17, on the far left, the blue bar at the bottom illustrate our consistent dividend payout. Approximately $900,000 per fiscal year through that -- through fiscal '17. At the beginning of 2018, the Board increased the dividend payment to $0.06 a share, thereby returning approximately $1 million to $1.1 million in cash to our shareholders quarterly through the present quarter. Today, on our press release, we announced that the Board has again continued the $0.06 quarterly dividend, and the next dividend payment will be May 1.
Continuing with the chart, the green bars represent cash used for acquisitions. Cash flows from operations have allowed us to invest for future growth through acquisitions with the extra cash while keeping and maintaining a healthy balance sheet. Our reinvestment through acquisitions has exceeded $15 million over the last 4 to 5 fiscal years, while also returning more than $15 million to our shareholders through this consistent dividend payments without taking on any borrower debt. Subsequent to the quarter, as Shawn mentioned earlier, we established a line of credit in the amount of $3.5 million. Under terms of this agreement, at our discretion, we either pay interest at the prime rate or a fixed rate based on LIBOR plus 1.75% on funds drawn. It's a 2-year term with the agreement and there are no charges on funds for underused line fees. The agreement requires the company to satisfy certain financial covenants relative to profitability, EBITDA and annually requires the company to maintain a 0 balance for a 30-day period. While credit provides us cash management capabilities into the future.
Moving on to the next slide. At the end of the year, again, we talked -- in the quarter, our cash was $12.2 million, which was up 7% compared to our fiscal year. Our balance sheet is clearly stronger today than a year ago as a direct result of our increased earnings power, cash flow generation and prudent allocation of capital.
Shawn, I'll turn the call back to you now.
Thank you, John. We're all navigating a new world, impacted by this unprecedented pandemic. Thus far, we fared better than most and are well positioned to continue our long track record of success even in these challenging times. I'm excited to add Lixoft to our already strong and diverse organization, helping grow our European presence and improving our revenue mix. Demand for our solutions remain strong, although we will likely see some measure of delay in new business as our customers deal with the ramifications and uncertainties this pandemic has caused. And with that, I'd like to turn it over and take any questions you might have.
[Operator Instructions] At this time, I will -- as we wait and poll for questions, go through some of the early written questions that are -- have been submitted. Actually, we are going to take the questions first from Matt Hewitt with Craig-Hallum. [Operator Instructions]
And thank you for providing some details on the coronavirus. Maybe just to dig in on that a little bit more and I realize that this is an ever-evolving situation. But as you're talking to your clients and you're seeing news that some of them are maybe pushing out some of their trial starts or continuations of trials. What is the feedback that you're getting from them? Are they waiting for 30 days and then they're going to get back to you? Are they saying, you know what, we're just going to push the trial start date from maybe instead of May 1, we're going to push it to June 1. Just any incremental color on what you're hearing from the clients would be helpful.
Yes, Matt, I appreciate the question. And obviously, everyone in most all regards is looking for that date certain that the trends turns downward that certainty or visibility to return to normalcy will take place. And unfortunately, no one has that crystal ball. And so discussions with clients, they're influx. They're evaluating, they're reallocating resources. You see the focus on COVID-related development opportunities that are being pursued, there's a lot of movement in that direction. Existing plans where other therapeutic areas and developments are being held to, but being cautious right now, they are not pointing to -- we're going to defer this from April 1 start to June 1 start, is we're going to defer it from our plans at April 1 start without a date identified going forward.
I think we're all operating in an environment in which we'd be able to plan better if we knew when the curve bends downward and that uncertainty just keeps us all in a wait-and-see mode. And I think that's the characteristic of the term that we get from clients. It's a little bit wait and see how things evolve here over the coming days, weeks and hopefully not too many months.
Understood. And then regarding the Lixoft acquisition, congratulations, looks like a great fit, and you even touched on some of the potentially cross-selling opportunities. How quickly, especially given the current environment, how quickly do you anticipate being able to integrate that business and see some of the benefits from the cross-selling?
I mean we're getting -- certainly, these things do take some time, but we've been planning in anticipation of the announcement that we've made last week. And so that number of efforts, plans, engagement points between the new organization and are starting to take hold in the coming months, I think the plans, both in terms of sales and marketing as well as product development will begin to take shape. I think that there are areas where there is a population of consulting opportunities that are out there, all subject to the same COVID issues that we've addressed already here.
But I think in that regard, there's a flow of business that was waiting for someone to catch it. And now with our consulting resources, we should be able to pick up the ball there relatively quickly. So I think things will move very quickly in this regard. It's a product space that isn't -- is adjacent to us, familiar to us. Our clients are the same. And so our ability to consolidate sales and marketing efforts should go very smooth and very quickly.
Okay. And then maybe one last one for me and I'll hop back in the queue. Regarding the new regulatory strategies team, maybe a little more color there as far as how should we be thinking about the size of those contracts, the duration, how -- what is that pipeline looking like? I realize it's early days, but is there a pipeline that's building? And when do you anticipate signing the first contract?
Sure. It's exciting. Sandra has been on board maybe a month now. And we've reached out into the marketplace and we've got, a, we get immediate positive response. She's well-known, well-regarded in the pharma community and got a lot of accolades back from the marketplace in terms of great to hear that she's joined the organization, a lot of excitement around that.
Yes, it's -- very quickly, it generated a number of leads that we are managing through. Right now, the types of projects and I guess I'd describe sort of 2 scenarios: one, opportunities that are regulatory advisory projects in and of themselves, meaning that's the point of the project and the service. And then secondly, in the breadth of the consulting offerings, the projects that we do, including in those projects, some allotment of a time. And use of Sandra's advice in effecting other projects, our mainstream projects, if you will, to get that regulatory advice and color and expertise that Sandra brings to the table. So she will fit into or drive the stand-alone new projects as well as contribute and add to the flow of existing consulting projects that we perform.
Thank you. At this time, we will walk through some of the written questions. The first question has come from Howard Halpern. You stated the acquisition of Lixoft will add approximately $3.5 million to the revenues. Given the continued lockdown in Europe, is that still attainable? And how does the margin profile? And over time, what is the plan to integrate it into the general consulting services?
Okay. Let me get to the first point in terms of revenue expectations, what we disclosed was that they closed the calendar year 2019 with $3.4 million in revenue. That means that they enter the calendar year traditionally enjoy that the vast majority, 90-plus percent of the $3.4 million should renew and recur into the calendar year '20 with our fiscal year of August year-end, we get in terms of mismatches in terms of the time frame so I understand, but the point is, that their base business, which is recurring revenue is at $3.5 million level. And so expectations are pretty high that we should be able to continue that into our fiscal year '21.
It's not highly dependent upon new software licensing. So we certainly expect that not to be 0 during this time frame. So on the margin side, there, gross margin, operating income, EBITDA percentages on a stand-alone basis over the prior 2 years, all exceeded, were at or exceeded our percentages in those regards of revenue in terms of their model performance. So they should add to and might, in a small way, improve our percentage results in terms of EBITDA percentage of revenue operating income.
In the last it was with regard to consulting, how quick that would come on board. There's sales cycles that are involved there. We know we've got leads -- can get leased pretty quickly. But now we're in that environment of COVID-9 (sic) [ COVID-19 ], so hard to say in terms of the speed of that sales cycle closure.
Thank you, Shawn. The next follow-up question from Howard is have you increased the use of webinars, virtual conferences to offset the some 20-plus conferences and presentations you attend in a given year? And do you expect any impact on your future customers in obtaining them?
Yes. We certainly gone virtual as many have on the business world, virtual in the sense of our webinars, our training, workshops, each of the divisions has moved, planned events into that format. And so we utilize that significantly. We've translated face-to-face sales meetings with virtual meetings. So we're keeping the pace of the activity going. No doubt, there is some slowness that creeps in as -- into the process, as we've talked about. But yes, we're leveraging the virtual world as best as we can.
And with this one additional question from Howard is, has the pipeline of consulting services across all
Yes. As I've said, the pipeline has actually grown as we've had a slower pace on the closure end of the sales cycle, the amount of the business that we are working in our pipeline has grown. Certainly, some of the opportunities have fallen off. But the additions to the pipeline have far exceeded the fallout there. And that is true across all 3 businesses. There still is some [ Cognigen ] and the consulting work we do have to take care. So...
Thank you, Shawn. And we're going back to a live question, a follow-up question from Matt Hewitt of Craig-Hallum.
Maybe -- I guess just one last one here. As you look at the sales force, I think you were up to 2. And did Lixoft bring -- also bring any sales resources? Or is that an area where you still maybe could look to add any heads there?
Yes. Lixoft brought a sales organization of Jonathan, the CEO, who was the primary sales front to the organization. Supported the Round #10 other Lixoft employees split pretty equally between software development personnel and applications personnel, applications personnel being those that support client- facing demonstrations, customer service and support, trainings and workshops, et cetera. So we've got an excellent sales person in Jonathan that's come on board. And our needs going forward, not immediate in terms of additions because of the acquisition, the joining of Lixoft, and in fact, it gives us the immediate benefit of having a senior sales-oriented executive like that in the geography. And just as we will be coming up to speed in terms of being able to front the Lixoft products here in the U.S. have them up to speed in terms of being able to front our products in Europe as well in this process.
We have a few more follow-up written questions. First one coming from [ Karl Hoffman ]. And how does the Lixoft software complement or potentially overlap any SLP existing software?
It's mostly an adjacent product. It's a product in PK/PD modeling world that covers a modeling -- it's a modeling platform but it allows the scientists to run from data exploration to the building of PK models, to primarily NOME is the type of modeling technique that it has engines for and then runs simulations off of that clinical trial simulations to the adjacent product to our PD/PK platform in gastric class. There is some functionality that crosses over but it's relatively minimal.
Thank you, Shawn. And one final follow-up question for Howard Halpern. Has there been any material change to your operating expense profile during this current pandemic environment and excluding the transaction cost, as mentioned, what are the expectations for percentage of sales for the remainder of the year on an operating basis, SG&A cost?
Well, United and Marriott had called me up and asked me where I've been over the last 8 years, [ 6 weeks ]. So I guess there probably is some expense that we're avoiding in this sort of work style, but -- I'm being a little facetious, I don't think it's dramatic, but certainly there is on the travel side. There's no -- we did not incur a tremendous expense related to taking our workforce off-site. Much of it was already in place. Most all employees were set up such that even if they worked in office that they have the capability of working from home on a temporary basis. So there is no great expenditure in terms of cost involved in the transition in that regard.
SG&A, excluding the impact of closing of the transaction and expenses that will continue to flow into the third quarter related to it. I think should continue to move as we have been for the last number of quarters, having stepped up in the lower revenue seasonality quarters above the 35%, you'll see that the average out with our second and third quarters, which are the higher revenue quarters. And we've been looking at keeping it as close as we can on the 35% for the year as a whole. I don't see anything that's changed in that regard other than the uncertainties is the top line in terms of our top line growth with COVID impacts.
Thank you, Shawn. It appears there is no further additional questions. With that, I conclude the conference call. Thank you, everyone. This does conclude today's conference call and webinar. If you've missed any part of today's presentation, the replay will be available on the website, simulations-plus.com.
Thank you, and have a good weekend.
Thanks, everyone. Be safe.
Good morning, and welcome to the Syneos Health First Quarter 2020 Earnings Conference Call. [Operator Instructions]
I would like to hand the conference over to Ronnie Speight, Senior Vice President of Investor Relations. Please go ahead, sir.
Good morning, everyone. With me on the call today are Alistair Macdonald, our Chief Executive Officer; Jason Meggs, our Chief Financial Officer; Michelle Keefe, our President of Commercial Solutions; and Paul Colvin, our President of Clinical Solutions.
In addition to the press release, a slide presentation corresponding to our prepared remarks is available on our website at investor.syneoshealth.com. Remarks that we make about future expectations, plans, growth, anticipated financial results and prospects and expected impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic for the company constitute forward-looking statements for purposes of the safe harbor provisions under the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, and we disclaim any obligation to update them. Actual results may differ materially from those indicated by these forward-looking statements as a result of various important factors.
These factors are discussed in the Risk Factors section of our Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, as updated by our Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2020, and our other SEC filings. During this call, we will discuss certain non-GAAP financial measures which exclude the effects of events and transactions we consider to be outside of our core operations. These non-GAAP measures should be considered as supplement to and not a replacement for measures prepared in accordance with GAAP. For a reconciliation of non-GAAP financial measures with the most directly comparable GAAP measures, please refer to the appendix of our presentation.
Finally, in accordance with social distancing protocols, all of the executives participating on this call have dialed in remotely from separate locations. We apologize in advance for any potential technical issues or delays and appreciate your patience.
I would now like to turn the call over to Alistair Macdonald. Alistair?
Thanks, Ronnie. Good morning, everyone, and thank you for joining us today. I hope you and your families are in good health and staying safe during these uniquely challenging times. As the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic continue to evolve, our team remains focused on protecting the health and safety of our colleagues, site staff, customers and the patients we all serve. As part of the global health care community collaborating to fight this pandemic, we are actively working with multiple customers to develop COVID-19 treatment and a vaccine. This battle requires unparalleled speed without compromising safety and regulatory requirements.
Customers are reaching out to us for everything from standing up trials to targeting communications for accelerated enrollment, to crisis communications to help their organizations manage through this challenging time. We also want to thank the frontline health care professionals, including many of our own Syneos Health clinically qualified volunteers who have been ICU bound, boldly fighting the pandemic. Their bravery is incredible, and we are grateful for their work to protect us all.
Lastly, before we get into the first quarter details, I want to thank all of my Syneos Health colleagues for their shared strength during this time. I'm incredibly proud of our team for living our values of challenging the status quo, collaborating to deliver solutions and exhibiting the passion to change lives, which has kept our culture resilient and strong. We believe our commitment to collaborating with customers, sites and the public health community will sustain and advance our collective efforts during this pandemic and beyond.
Turning now to our financial results. Let me start by saying that despite the near-term challenges, we remain confident in the long-term strength of our business and strategy, given our robust backlog and the unique market position we have created. The momentum in our business that began to accelerate in 2019 carried over into our Q1 2020 results, and we expect it to continue to build as the impacts of COVID-19 subside. After discussing the results for the first quarter, I will take some time today to detail how we are addressing the effects of COVID-19 and the different impacts and trends we are seeing across the business.
But first, let me start with our key highlights from the quarter. First, we closed Q1 with strong net new business awards inclusive of a record first quarter for clinical, resulting in a book-to-bill ratio of 1.4x for Clinical Solutions, 1.07x for Commercial Solutions and 1.32x for our total company. This brings us to $5.7 billion of net awards and an aggregate book-to-bill ratio of 1.21x for the trailing 12-month period.
Second, our clinical business continues to show strong performance with year-over-year growth of 8.5% or 9.2% in constant currency. Third, we remain confident in our overall financial position and liquidity. At the end of the quarter, we had $336 million in cash and $281 million of capacity available on our revolving credit facility. We expect to generate free cash flow for the remainder of 2020 and have taken proactive steps to further preserve capital and provide financial flexibility, which Jason will describe in more detail.
Now going into the details of our results. We had a solid quarter overall, especially considering the rapidly changing macro environment during March. Total adjusted revenue grew 3.8% or 4.4% in constant currency, which was in line with our expectations. In addition to strong revenue growth, Clinical Solutions delivered a record first quarter of net awards, resulting in a total clinical net awards of $4.5 billion and a book-to-bill ratio of 1.27x for the trailing 12-month period. These awards were broad-based as we continue to establish and deepen our presence in top 20 pharma through our new preferred provider relationships.
This consistency of awards flow is one of the strategic benefits of growing our share with top pharma customers. Our year-over-year clinical backlog growth accelerated to 12.3%, and our pipeline of new opportunities remains robust. We did not experience any meaningful cancellations in our clinical segment related to COVID-19, although we have seen some customers slowing award decisions or postponing start dates for awarded programs.
Our Commercial Solutions segment experienced a revenue decline of 8.1% compared to the prior year, primarily due to an unfavorable revenue mix and lower-than-anticipated reimbursable expenses. Although the team finished the quarter with relatively strong awards, the awards were offset somewhat by higher contemplated in our full year revenue forecast. However, they did occur earlier in the year than expected, thus impacting book-to-bill. This resulted in $1.3 billion of net awards and a book-to-bill of 1.04x for the trailing 12-month period. Our pipeline of commercial opportunities remains robust given some delays in customer decisions and increased RFP volume.
As we turn to COVID-specific commentary, protecting the health and safety of our employees, customers and industry colleagues is paramount in our response. Our response is led by a Business Continuity Transition Management Office or TMO, which combines the project management discipline of the Trusted Process with our well-established transition management leadership. This group manages and monitors employee safety and our rapid and seamless transition to remote operations, all while ensuring consistent business performance.
The TMO is now planning the next phase in our COVID-19 response, which is the safe return to a more traditional operating model, when appropriate. We anticipate that this will occur in phases over several months, and we will be ready to deploy our field teams and reopen our facilities in this new normal. We have also focused on sourcing personal protective equipment, establishing office cleaning and safety protocols and staging personnel to return based upon prioritization criteria. In the meantime, we will continue to comply with all appropriate protocols and government mandates.
In addition to the decisive actions we have taken to protect our employees and ensure business continuity, we have also supported the public health response within our local communities. From the onset, we have extended our fight against the pandemic by engaging in public health initiatives to address acute needs in local communities where our talent and expertise can help. Let me share a few examples. Firstly, across collaborative medical and communications team created a public service educational initiative to raise awareness of the use of bi-level positive airway pressure or BiPAP machines to reduce the need for mechanical ventilation for intubated COVID-19 patients.
Our staff in the U.K. answered the call also in collaboration with other ACRO members to participate as volunteers to increase the level of COVID-19 testing. And as mentioned, we also enabled our clinically- qualified medical staff to practice during this time, adding further strength to the global pandemic response. We are very proud of our people and these initiatives. The wave of passion and energy within Syneos Health to help patients has been magnified with our employees and teams that are ready to do whatever they can to be a part of the solution.
With that broader context, I thought it would be helpful to detail some of the impacts we are experiencing and how we are responding. Let's start with the full-service portion of our Clinical Solutions segment, representing about 60% of our total revenues. It is important to note that over 70% of our clinical businesses comprise of essential therapeutic areas that we believe may see reduced impacts, such as oncology, rare disease and orphan diseases, and other complex disease areas where patients have limited treatment options. Our clinical teams have experienced limitations accessing investigative sites, although only about 10% are inaccessible. Of the remainder, 80% to 90% are allowing at least some level of virtual activity, and we have seen these trends continue into April.
Overall, this environment primarily impacts clinical monitoring activities, which comprise about 30% of our full-service revenue. Our clinical teams have done an incredible job of transitioning to remote monitoring, taking a leadership position in partnership with ACRO, along with other virtual activities. During the second quarter, we expect to convert 70% to 80% of our site visits to remote monitoring using a highly tailored approach with additional follow-up requirements dependent upon a site's capability to provide remote access to electronic health record platforms. While site access has certainly been more limited in the heavily impacted regions such as China, Italy and Spain, we have continued to conduct at least some live site visits in these areas. We have also begun to see sites in these areas that were impacted earlier slowly resuming activities.
In addition, our clinical teams have experienced delays in both patient enrollment and the start-up of new clinical trials. New patient enrollment is down significantly thus far in April, driven primarily by some of our customers taking a short-term pause to ensure patient safety and continuity within their trials. Although we are continuing to make progress on the regulatory, ethics and other work that precedes site activation itself, such that we stand ready to move quickly on the final start-up activities. In an effort to drive further billable activity, our clinical teams are accelerating recruitment in less affected regions, accelerating other billable activities such as trial master file work and reassigning staff.
Our clinical functional service provider, or FSP business, represents about 11% of our total revenues. These teams have seen similar impacts on their ability to access investigative sites, but that only impacts clinical monitoring services, which are about 50% of FSP revenue. It is important to note that most teams within FSP are contracted on an FTE basis, not based upon units of activity. Therefore, shorter- term disruptions are less likely to impact revenue from existing teams, particularly given their embedded knowledge of our customers' processes, studies and systems. The remainder of our FSP business comprises functions like biometrics, data management and safety, which have traditionally performed most of their work remotely.
Our early phase business within clinical, which represents only about 2% of our total revenue, includes the clinics that represent the small portion of our business that requires on-site operational staff. We have temporarily scaled back our clinics because we're unable to host groups of healthy volunteers due to safety concerns, and we are also seeing customers delay some of their related programs. However, our bioanalytical and translational medicine labs within this business continue to operate.
Moving to our Commercial Solutions segment, where Deployment Solutions represents the largest component at about 17% of our total revenue. In this business, we believe the nature of our customer base, the mix of the products we support and the types of health care provider locations we interact with will position our integrated services to remain an essential component of commercialization for our customers. Note that Deployment Solutions currently drives over 60% of its revenue from top 50 pharma where product portfolios are more diverse and stable. Over 80% of our Deployment Solutions field teams are supporting chronic care therapies, a category where total prescription volume has remained stable. Approximately 90% of our current call activity is in physician offices, or outside of the hospital setting where COVID-19 treatment concentration is not prevalent.
While our Deployment Solutions field teams have faced limitations on their abilities to physically visit their health care providers, or HCPs, they have quickly transitioned to virtual activities enabled by the breadth of our capabilities. Our learning solutions and engagement center teams collaborated during March to train our field reps to effectively manage virtual activities given travel restrictions, while taking into consideration the capacity of each individual office and customer preferred protocols. By mid-March, 90% of our field teams have been successfully transitioned to a virtual work-from-home environment. By mid-April, the weekly volume of our field team's virtual interactions with our HCPs have nearly matched the level of in-person interactions that were occurring prior to COVID-19.
This transition has been enabled by our investments in omni-channel capabilities over the last 2 years. We are also seeing significant customer interest in our engagement center, which is enabled with multichannels to engage customers, including telephony, video and digital tools. This interest, along with increased interest in hybrid representatives, demonstrate our customers' interest in evaluating modified commercial models. It is also important to note that our Deployment Solution field teams are similar to our clinical FSP business, in that they are primarily contracted on an FTE basis. In addition, the majority of these contracts have substantial termination notice periods of up to 120 days. While this also makes them less vulnerable to shorter-term disruptions, like an FSP, we have begun to see customers delaying the start-up of new programs and the backfilling of open positions.
The communications business, which comprises about 8% of our total revenue, is more important now than ever, helping our customers communicate to their key stakeholders. A recent survey we completed of over 250 HCPs confirm their need to continue to stay abreast of new therapies and data as well as their desire for information and materials to support treatment decisions. The majority of our communication business is direct to HCPs rather than consumers or other audiences and does not include meaningful media buying revenue. We are also seeing healthy year-over-year growth in our pipeline of opportunities across communications. Like our Deployment Solutions business, the COVID-related impact has primarily been slower decisions around new business awards.
Lastly, within Commercial Solutions, our consulting business represents about 2% of our overall revenue. This business already operates in a virtual work environment. So it has been largely unaffected by COVID-19. In fact, we saw continued strength across all of our consulting practice areas in the first quarter with a robust backlog of work going into April. Over 85% of our consulting business is in health care, which has proven to be more durable than the broader consulting market. Further, our practice includes commercial and medical affairs strategy, where we help customers reevaluate their launch strategy of new products given the changing environment. It also includes risk evaluation and mitigation strategy and regulatory quality and compliance practices, programs which are largely driven by regulatory requirements.
Finally, we have implemented cost reduction and cash preservation initiatives in all areas and have additional measures planned and ready to implement, if needed, which Jason will outline in more detail. We are balancing these measures with our commitment to maintain excellent delivery, quality and quickly reaccelerate any impacted activities for the benefit of our customers.
Now let me turn it over to Jason for more comments on our financial performance. Jason?
Thank you, Alistair, and good morning, everyone. In navigating the unprecedented circumstances of a global pandemic and its impact on our business, I realize and appreciate even more the importance of having a strong, resilient organization with a collaborative culture. To that end, I wanted to take a moment to thank my entire team for their incredible work to support the company and all of our stakeholders during this challenging time. After I take you briefly through our first quarter results, I will spend some time outlining the proactive steps we are taking to manage the impacts of COVID-19.
As shown on Slide 4, our revenue for the first quarter of 2020 was $1.16 billion, up 3.8% and up 4.4% in constant currency compared to the first quarter of 2019 on an adjusted basis. Slide 5 shows that our Clinical Solutions revenue grew 8.5% or 9.2% in constant currency to $874.8 million for the first quarter on an adjusted basis. The growth in Clinical Solutions revenue in the first quarter was primarily driven by higher revenue from net new business awards and higher growth in reimbursable expenses, partially offset by the impact of FX. Revenue growth was somewhat stronger-than-anticipated in our real-world and late phase business as we continue to further penetrate that market.
While clinical outperformed our expectations in January and February, we did begin to see revenue pressure in March related to COVID-19. However, our clinical team continued to focus on driving trial continuity plans and ensuring patient safety. We anticipate that we'll recover revenue for the majority of these COVID-19 related activities in the second half of the year. Moving to Slide 6, as expected, our first quarter Commercial segment revenue declined 8.1% year-over-year to $288.5 million and declined 8% in constant currency. The decline in commercial revenue during the first quarter was driven primarily by unfavorable revenue mix and slower growth in reimbursable expenses.
Adjusted EBITDA for the first quarter was $137.4 million, an increase of 1.8% year-over-year, resulting in an adjusted EBITDA margin of 11.8%, a decrease of 20 basis points compared to the first quarter of 2019. The decline in adjusted EBITDA margin for the first quarter was primarily driven by Commercial Solutions' margin contraction, partially offset by Clinical Solutions' margin growth. Adjusted diluted EPS of $0.68 for the first quarter grew by 15.3% year-over-year, driven by lower interest expense and growth in adjusted EBITDA.
As it relates to guidance, given the uncertainty surrounding both the magnitude and duration of the impacts of COVID-19 on our business and our customers, we will not provide financial guidance at this time. We will continue to monitor the situation, while staying in close contact with our customers and plan to provide an update as soon as possible, taking into account all the facts and circumstances.
To evaluate the expected impacts of COVID-19 on our business, we have prepared and evaluated forecasts under a variety of different scenarios. While we currently expect that the impacts to our revenue will to recover, we have developed contingency plans for alternate scenarios, should the impacts be more significant or extend further in duration.
Accordingly, as outlined on Slide 8, we have implemented a number of proactive cost savings measures to minimize margin impacts, including: accelerated certain actions in ForwardBound, our margin enhancement initiatives of organizational and operating model efficiencies; delayed hiring of nonbillable headcount; reduced or eliminated third-party costs and nonessential contractors; implemented temporary salary reductions for our Board of Directors, executives and highly compensated individuals; suspended our 401(k) match; executed voluntary furloughs; and rationalized our portfolio of services.
The collective impact of these proactive measures will vary based on required duration of each. We currently anticipate total cost reductions, including reduced reimbursable out-of-pocket expenses, will allow us to maintain a full year adjusted EBITDA margin in the range of 13% to 14%, generally in line with our results for the full year 2019. We are prepared to extend these reductions further and institute additional more aggressive measures as needed.
Further, we have also implemented measures to supplement our cash reserves and preserve liquidity and financial flexibility, including drawing $300 million on our revolving credit facility to supplement our cash reserves, delaying certain capital expenditures, pausing share repurchases, executing interest rate swaps to fixed variable rate debt at lower interest rates and renegotiating key vendor terms.
Now turning to cash flow and the balance sheet as summarized on Slide 9. During the first quarter, our operations used $38.6 million in cash flow. Although cash flow from operations is seasonally lower in the first quarter, the first quarter of 2020 was further pressured by higher vendor payments, including reimbursable out-of-pocket expenses, along with incentive compensation, partially offset by improved collections and lower restructuring and integration costs. DSO for the quarter was 50.9 days.
Given the $300 million draw on our revolving credit facility in March, we ended the quarter with $336 million of unrestricted cash and total debt outstanding of $2.97 billion. Given the minimal associated costs and out of an abundance of caution, we decided to draw down incremental cash on our revolving credit facility during March. It is important to note that we have not yet experienced any meaningful working capital impacts due to COVID-19.
Slide 9 also provides an update on our debt management and capital deployment activities. We continue to focus on a balanced approach to capital deployment to drive shareholder value, which we have always highlighted. However, the uncertainty of the current environment dictates that we focus on capital preservation, while we continue to access the extent and duration of the impacts of COVID-19.
During the first quarter, we executed additional interest rate swaps with a notional value of $549.2 million to reduce the cost of our variable rate debt. The execution of these swaps also increases the portion of our debt that is effectively fixed from 36% at December 31, 2019, to 54% at March 31, 2020. We also repurchased $32 million of our common stock during the first quarter before curtailing these purchases in order to preserve liquidity. While this leaves an additional $136.3 million of repurchase capacity, we currently do not intend to repurchase any additional shares during the second quarter, and we'll continue to evaluate the program on a quarterly basis as market conditions evolve.
Our non-GAAP effective tax rate for the first quarter was 24%, and we expect to maintain that rate for the full year of 2020. Given the benefit of our NOL deductions, we expect our actual net cash outlay for taxes in 2020 to be approximately $20 million. This completes our prepared remarks, and we'd be happy to answer any questions. Operator?
[Operator Instructions] Our first question or comment comes from the line of Eric Coldwell from Baird.
During a crisis or a downturn, it's historically not been unusual for pre-commercial biotechs to tap the break, sometimes slam on the brakes as they preserve capital. I'm just curious, in the slides you show you made client concentration, which is helpful, but would you be able to parse out that client diversity a bit more maybe out of by number of accounts or specifically what portion of that business is actually pre- commercial biotechs?
Yes. Eric, it's Alistair. I hope you're doing well. I think in the accompanying slides, there's -- on Page 7, there's a breakout on the left-hand side that looks a little bit at that pre-revenue biotech exposure for clinical, which is under 10%. And then on the commercial side, we have some pre-commercial biotechs that we do consulting for medcomms and market access strategy, that kind of thing. So it's quite low. And I think that as we've evolved as an organization over the last couple of years, we've moved away from this exposure to that pre-revenue biotechs to a much more established biotechs and the large pharma, which helps in a situation like this to have that balanced portfolio of customers.
Do you -- Alistair, do you share my concerns or views that perhaps that client base in this environment could be a bit riskier than large pharma? I mean, I've heard of both arguments during our channel checks in the last couple of weeks, but...
I think you can look at it couple of ways, right? So they're the people whose liquidity is going to be most critical. But they're also the section of customers, if you like, the group of customers where time is their enemy. So any delay to trials, any elongation of the trials, they have a certain amount of capital on the balance sheet that they're deploying into the execution of a trial, these delays don't help them in if this goes through Q2, Q3, creates 6-month additional execution time and they're currently running trials, they've got to find the capital to keep going for another 6 months. So I think that will cause some headwinds there. But what we've seen is, we're very cautious when we take on new customers in that sector to look at their liquidity and their ability to fund the trials all the way through. And I think we feel comfortable about the set that we work with, that we connect with are well capitalized, managing their work well. And we've been able to connect with them, have meaningful conversations with them about how we're trying to keep the trials running either through remote activity or pushing more recruitment into unaffected areas at this time. So yes, I think this -- you can look at that both ways. They are the people who might not place a trial at the moment because of liquidity issues and clarity on how long it's going to last. But again, these are the organizations where time is not their friend, and they've got that push to get back on with it as quickly as they can or continue going as much as they can.
That's really helpful. If I could get one more quick one in to Jason. Jason, I realize in respect that you withdrew your guidance, but some companies have been able to offer either a framework or perhaps guardrails around the second quarter. Just to help narrow the range of estimates on The Street, perhaps provide some level setting for expectations without pressing you too hard on this, is there any chance we could get you to do the same?
Yes. Yes. We're not going to provide the formal guidance as we mentioned there, but can talk a little bit about how we see the sequencing in our internal models. As mentioned in the prepared remarks, the second quarter is where we see the most significant revenue impact. That's also where we will have the highest sort of dollar value of savings. But it's just not -- the savings are taking a little bit of time to get moving here as we responded to the pandemic, so that -- the margin impact for the second quarter will also be the largest impact. And then as we come into quarter 3, the revenue starts to come back, and the savings are fully bedded in, including some of the permanent savings, we anticipate seeing margins tick up and be broadly in line with what we've seen in prior year quarter 3s. And then quarter 4 is always, every year, our largest margin quarter, and we don't expect there to be any different this year from that perspective. So -- and that's where we'll see the highest margin percentage.
Our next question or comment comes from the line of David Windley from Jefferies.
Hope everybody is well. One of the things that I think stands out the most to me in some of your statistics here is your quantification of inaccessible sites, and that's a number that is quite a bit lower than your peers. So I wanted to understand more color around that, both in terms of kind of how you're defining access? And then are you using -- do you think you're using sites that are materially different than your peers? I'll stop there.
Okay. Dave, good to hear from you. I think there's a few elements at play here. So we moved very quickly early in the whole kind of pandemic starting to move out of China and Asia. We moved very quickly. And I think Paul and his team did a tremendous job of starting to switch to remote monitoring, the fact that we have the capabilities and the technology to do it, the speed that we did it with and also the relationships we have with site. We've banded on about sites being a big part of our model and the relationships with sites for a long time. And I think that helps because we have that relationship. We have a good strong relationship with them. And I also think it's the therapies. So you've referenced the type of sites.
I think it's driven by the therapies that we're working. So when we look at kind of the percentages of the essential treatments we work in, and what I mean by that, oncology, rare disease, orphan, the really complex CNS and gen med spaces, inflammation, immunology, et cetera, we have a really big load, really big kind of trial load in those really complicated spaces. And we're seeing those trial sites stay engaged, stay monitoring their patients very closely. Our ability to plug into the electronic health records because we did it early and maybe got ahead of the pack a little bit when we did that because of that early move. I think all those things combined help us stay in context, keep the sites engaged and keep them moving forward. I'll flip you over to Paul for some of the definitions around what we consider accessibility. The 10% is just where we can't get anything out of the site. I will tell you that. But let me pass you over to Paul, and Paul will give you a bit more detail on that site engagement from. So Paul?
Thanks. Dave, yes, I think it's a great question. And I think it comes down to the definition as you think about what accessibility means. And as Alistair said, I do think our TA mix plays a big part in that. But what we're seeing is that the sites are still very active as well in trying to engage in start-up activities. And so if you look at what we've seen to-date, just around regulatory submissions, we continue to work toward activations, and we're still seeing a high percentage of our submissions compared to prior years. So sites are still wanting to engage in getting ready for the next wave of studies. They're still also engaging in remote monitoring. We've seen a number of sites that -- where we can have access to -- remote access to EHRs and can continue monitoring. We're still seeing sites that are actively helping us to ensure patient continuity and treatment and safety reviews. So we haven't seen much of a drop-off on that part. So I think it's just -- when you think about the definition of inaccessibility, sites, especially in oncology and other areas, they're going to continue treatment of that patient. They want to continue the safety monitoring, and we're able to do that across the sites.
So to clarify, so 10% is you can't get a CRA on site. You can't get remote access to the technology, EMR. You can't get anything. That's your kind of 10% quantification?
Correct. They're not allowing any site activations. They're not doing anything on regulatory submissions. They just are inundated with the COVID at this point at that level. We're seeing the other 80%, 90% that are still active in some form or fashion around continuing the continuity of those studies.
Okay. Understood. And then, Jason, probably for you, a follow-up -- kind of a follow-up to Eric's question. I just want to make sure, given that -- maybe I'm being too myopic here, but given that your operational path seems a little clearer because your engagement with sites is higher, and that seems to be where COVID is the most disruptive. So your operational path seems a little clearer than your others -- than your peers, but you're removing guidance and some of them have given 2Q guidance, as Eric commented. I just want to make sure that the -- and your first quarter was quite good. I just want to make sure that the kind of choice to not give guidance is not a reflection of a significant deterioration beyond March that is more precipitous. It doesn't sound like that's the case, but I just want to make sure.
Well, can I -- Jason, can I just jump in front, sorry. I think, philosophically, Dave, on the guidance side, I think we're well prepared operationally. We're plugged in remotely right across the businesses and able to come back with sites, and we're already seeing some great optimism, sites starting to reopen in Asia Pac and actually even into Europe and some in the U.S. So we're seeing some optimism there as we reopening plan is going to look like, and it's going to be down to local governments that enable sites to get back to full kind of -- full capability, which enables us to get back to full on-site activities, which obviously drives the revenues, et cetera. So it's -- like you said, it's not because of a precipitous different, overall, that we're seeing compared to anybody else. It's just that we don't feel confident enough to pick that -- what that curve looks like on the other side of this, whether it's a V, whether it's a U, whether it's more like a check mark. I don't think anybody really knows that yet. It's unprecedented. So it's more related to our -- how we feel about that philosophically than anything else. But Jason, I just wanted to kind of add that thought process.
Yes. Yes. And Dave, just to add. We don't -- we have not seen anything precipitous in terms of the falloff post quarter 1. I think Alistair hit the remarks about pipeline and things of that nature. And we talked about the operational metrics there that have continued into the second quarter. We do have disruption. I mean, that certainly is what we see. How that stacks up to others and definitions is hard. I think that top line and how that moves through the second quarter and third quarter is the hard part, from our perspective, given the depth and duration, I think what we focus more on is, hey, we can impact our cost base in a way that is temporary and/or permanent, and we do control that, and we want to do that quickly and go deeply early, so that we can weather this as best we can early on and then tilt that back percentage-wise of the total cost base over the months and quarter. And that's what we plan to do, while we also have more opportunities in front of us if we want to extend the temporary items or we can do more permanent items. So we're focused on what we could control, and that's the cost side of things. And that's what you see coming through with the margin percentage that we wanted to get some guardrails on, as Eric put it.
Our next question or comment comes from the line of John Kreger from William Blair.
I have 2 questions. Alistair, can you maybe just comment on what sort of operational performance you're seeing? And how it might compare across the U.S., Europe and Asia, particularly, as you mentioned just a few minutes ago, some of the reopenings that you're starting to see? So that's the first question. And the second question is you gave us some good stats about site accessibility. It sounds like that was primarily relating to your ability to do monitoring. How about in terms of patient ability to actually see their physicians? And how is that part of the clinical trial process holding up?
Sure. So on the metric side, John, we -- our regular operational metrics that we look at are driven actually from an activity basis sites -- on a site level kind of on-site visits, face-to-face time, phone visits, remote visits, kind of the real-world evidence side of the business as well. So we track them very closely. We track them by therapeutic business unit. As you guys know, we still run therapeutically. We track it by the FSP visits. So the -- whether that's in aggregate across our FSP business or by the actual customer business units that sit within there. And then we've been looking at how those have been ramping up and back down. So what we saw, obviously, is a big drop-off in face-to-face visits. We still have face-to-face visits going on. I think metrics wise about 15% of what we'd normally expect to see is still active.
And that is actually across all regions, so U.S. and Asia, I think, more so than Europe right now. But we continue to track those. We've seen a huge pickup, obviously, in the remote numbers because as we switched, you get that transition in the 2 lines crossed. And we're at good numbers on the remote monitoring visit side. Like we said before, we've got good site engagement still. We're still plugged into the majority of our sites, still supporting them in what they need, talking to them now about how do they return to work successfully and what we can do to help them and that kind of stuff. So there's a constant the support that it needs. And obviously, there's a lot of off-site time as well. On-site time is about 30% of the overall. And then you've got TMF, so you've got kind of writing of reports and other associated activities that go along with those visits but actually kind of aren't connected to be in -- actually engage with somebody on the site or actually on the site itself.
Second part of your question, I think, is more difficult for us to see in the metrics about how many patients are going back on site. Obviously, a lot of our sites are engaging with patients directly from their homes. So they're kind of remote to the patient as well because of social distancing protocols. We've been working with sites to make sure medication where applicable and where appropriate can be sent to a patient. We've got -- if you think about the relationship we've put in place with AiCure, we can actually watch the patient take their medication. That's what that system does. So -- and that's not plugged in on all trials, but it's on some of the CNS trials, et cetera. So we can actually make sure that patient is compliant and that kind of thing. For those patient numbers, I don't -- I'm going to ask Paul, but I don't think we have much metric around actual patients returning to sites yet. I know we're seeing it in Asia to a certain degree. And in some locations in the U.S., we've seen it's been a constant. But Paul, I don't know if we track any metric like that. Do we?
I mean I think the easiest metric to look at would be just dropouts, and we have not seen a lot of patient dropouts from studies. I think, again, it goes back to your original comment, Alistair, on the TA mix. Many of the conditions we're treating, patients need to have that continuity of therapy. And so they are going to continue that therapy. But I think the biggest indicator is on dropouts, and we have not seen a spike in patient dropouts from studies. We do monitor that. And we're continuing, obviously, to measure, as you said, the live visits. We actually saw a spike, an increase in the last 2 weeks around live visits. We are, as you said, between the 10% and 15% range on what visits and submissions continue to go up. So I think those are the biggest indicators that those sites are still active, and patients are still active on study.
Our next question or comment comes from the line of Erin Wright from Crdit Suisse.
Crdit Suisse AG, Research Division lines, generally speaking, for as a CRO or a solutions provider in this industry? Do you anticipate that being a meaningful offsetting factor for you? And have you -- I assume you're having those conversations as we speak as well with sponsors.
Yes. Thanks, Erin. I think it's a natural part of this, right? So the impact of COVID is going to elongate trials, in general terms. You're going to see a reduction. The statistics aren't going to change. The power of these trials is not going to change. So we're still going to need 500 patients for a 500-patient trial, but it's going to take us longer to get to them. So that extends -- let's say, it's a 6-month kind of elongation of trials. That's going to expand project management time duration -- things, units that are driven by durations. And that's going to -- those things are going to get passed through to customers in some regards, which will move -- that revenue doesn't go away. It just moves to the right. Like you say, it will drive change order activity, and it will move that revenue to right effectively. So we think we see that -- those activities moving along now. There's also the shift to remote monitoring. There are some changes to the cost structure for that. And we're not -- the EMA issued guidance on what they think about remote monitoring, the changes around COVID, the day before yesterday. So we are still evaluating those regulatory comments, et cetera, and the impact. So you're going to see a reduction, if you like, in the cost of monitoring visit as it moved from on-site to remote, take out the travel time, there's -- you can't do everything that you could have done on site, so you're probably going to get 70% of the revenue for that.
But then that's going to offset, to some degree, by the increase in project duration.
Okay, great. And then a broader question here. Do you think some of this COVID disruption should drive any sort of stepped-up industry consolidation across the CROs? Do you think that there's opportunities there from a consolidation standpoint?
It's a good question. It's a question I haven't given much thought to, to be below us. We've been occupied in other ways recently, obviously. I don't know if this will be an individual driver of more consolidation. I think if the CRO, maybe some of the smaller ones without a liquidity it have problems. I don't know, maybe they become targets for consolidation, I don't know. But I don't think of the higher echelons of the business, it will drive consolidation meaningfully from what's out there already.
Our next question or comment comes from the line of Tycho Peterson from JPMorgan.
Alistair, you mentioned recruiting patients from less affected areas. I'm just curious how successful that strategy has been in this environment. And are there other actions you're taking to increase start-up times from like a patient recruitment standpoint?
Tycho, I think early before the pandemic spread much wider, yes, we had some good success with diverting recruitment to other locations. We're still having some success with that. We have -- I don't think there's much out there that you can do right now to increase or enhance patient enrollment because you have the other factor, the patient's fear of going into a center if that's required as part of the recruitment. I'll ask Paul if he's got any thoughts. I'll come to Paul in a second if he's got any thoughts on that. But I don't think that we're seeing much that's really accelerating a trial at the moment, unless it's COVID-19 trial, obviously, which we have a few of those going. Paul, any thoughts on that?
Yes, Tycho, it's a good question. We -- I think at this point, it's global enough that there aren't places you really can go to find an offset from that perspective. I do think that, again, the mix of therapeutic areas we have, patients still are going to want to join therapy. I'd also say that some of our larger partners are also looking at action plan to start opening enrollment. Remember, part of enrollment dropoff was a decision by some of the larger client base. But I think they're reevaluating that. And I think that will be helpful as you look at enrollment as well. Sites are still actively wanting to have enrollment in many therapeutic areas. So I think we'll start to see that over time improve just because of the decisions from the client base.
And then a follow-up on the question earlier on change order costs. I appreciate you think it will be pushed out to the right. But is your view that you will be able to pass on most of the incremental costs? And then as we think about kind of mid- trial protocol changes, how seamless will those discussions, I guess, be with the sponsors? Or how much friction could there be in terms of going back and having to redo work? And is it generally understood what the FDA is going to require to the extent that work needs to go back and be redone?
Well, again, I'll ask Paul for his comment as he's closer to that than me. But I do think that this pandemic posts -- sends all of our customers in the same situation. So we're not going back to customers to try and explain change orders that they don't really understand what happened. It is always a driver for getting into an argument with a customer on a change order. So I think the customers are very clear at the moment. I think we've had more engagement with customers than we even normally do, and we're a heavily engaged organization when it comes to the customer front. So we've had deep discussion -- we've got detailed discussions around the impacts. Like I said before, we're still -- the MA released its guidance on what I expect to see from remote monitoring and this situation only 2 days ago. So we're evaluating that still and how that will guide conversations around change orders. But I think our customers certainly understand, either through the trials they're running themselves or through as in other CROs that this pandemic posts in that change -- in the trial, which will lead to a change order. It's even on fixed- price trials where we have what we would call a material change addendum, this will qualify under that. It's something that's outside, completely outside of our control and expectation for trials that are up and running. So yes, I think those conversations will take place. There are -- we're already laying some of that out for customers and the expectations around that. But right now, the focus, really, has been on how do we contain -- how do we get the sites moved over to remote, how do we manage the patient loads, how do we manage to keep these trials compliant, keep the patients compliant, et cetera. And now we're moving on to what the financial impacts of moving to a remote stance and the elongation of trials.
And of course, customers will only want to do that once they know the full impact of the change. So how long are we going to be remote, how long are we going to be delayed, et cetera, which -- so you can give them the whole packet in one go. So we're looking at that going through those discussions. Paul idea?
I mean if I can add to that, I think, what we've really also done is the amount of proactive communication that we've put out from our communications team. We've created lens for our clients to view what the actions are that we're taking. And to be very honest, I have a lot of interactions with our clients. I've never been prouder to be a part of this industry because I think every single client that I've spoken to, their first messaging is patient safety, continuity of this trial and the therapy for the patients. So we've been very transparent about that. And I think we're seeing a real partnership with most of our clients where they want to see that patient safety and continuity. And we're all doing the right thing to keep these trials going. So I do think we'll be able, as we work through this together, to find the right solution and make sure we're doing the right things to keep continuity for patients. I don't anticipate that being a huge headwind.
Yes. Okay. And if I could ask just one more, just on commercial. How do you think about the recovery there? And obviously, the margin hit was significant on that side. Are there any cost saves biased towards that side of the business, or is that not the right way to think about it?
Well, Michelle is on the phone, so we can talk about that with Michelle as well. But the cost savings, we've looked at, Tycho, corporately across the business. I think what we're seeing on the commercial side is, again, a good -- a quick and enabled switch to remote and engagement with HCPs across that business. So Michelle, any comments on that?
Sure. So a couple of things. First, as Alistair talked about, our Deployment Solutions business quickly moved to remote engagement with customers and because of the capabilities that we've invested in, in omnichannel. And frankly, our expertise from our engagement center of accessing customers over the phone or over the web or on video as well as our Learning Solutions team. We basically took that learnings and those capabilities and taught them to our field representatives, which sounds like a little thing, but is actually a very big thing, really understanding how to navigate an office with empathy through difficult times. So the field representatives did really, really well and are already back to pre-COVID call activity through virtual channels, right? So I think that, that's really important.
I think the other thing that we've seen in regards to the pipeline, which is encouraging is we're just seeing delays in decisions. We're not seeing any customers pulling our fees back or saying that they're not going to continue to focus on the areas that they've been focusing on. So most of the issue has been pushes in decisions from a pipeline perspective, so that's why the pipeline is looking strong. So in regards to comms and consulting, those businesses work very effectively remotely. We've done multiple virtual pitches. We're winning business virtually. And so that business has been operating pretty successfully in a remote environment as well. So we're ready to go when we can get back into offices and back in to customers, but our interactions remotely have met pre-COVID level. So we're confident we have what we need to be successful throughout this delay, but then to be able to quickly get back into driving revenue and driving us there.
Yes. And then, Tycho, this is Jason here. Just to finish that off. On the margin side, as Michelle and Alistair both hit, Alistair a little bit in the prepared remarks. But we started seeing the delays there at the -- close to the end of the quarter, particularly on our field team side and things of that nature, that did roll the net revenue coming down some, and therefore, the margins did take a hit. I would say, though, when you look at our internal plan, we were only down about 1 point. Because in prior year, we had some favorable revenue mix items that pumped the margin up. So that's historically one of the lower -- this is our lower- margin quarter. So just to give a little color there in terms of the mix and then how that compares to our internal plan.
Our next question or comment comes from the line of Sandy Draper from SunTrust.
A lot of my questions have been asked and answered. Maybe, and this is probably more for Jason. You're operating very differently today when you -- as the CFO, start to look across the operations, are there areas where you say, yes, we want to get back to normal, clearly, but these are things we actually are realizing we don't have to do any more. These are expenses we don't have to spend. And I'm thinking, obviously, you guys were doing a bunch of cost savings plans and getting synergies and had ongoing initiatives. But are there material new areas you are uncovering from this unfortunate circumstance that you're saying, "Hey, going forward over the long term, these are identifiable cost savings areas that we had not necessarily considered or contemplated before?"
Sandy, it's Alistair. Just -- I think this whole environment, this whole issue, really, is a driver for us to evaluate more than just cost savings. We're looking at -- we have a strategic plan -- a strategic planning cycle that we run on a 3-year basis that we're in the middle of right now. And we're looking at what are we learning from this activity, people working from home. I mean, the efficiency of people working from home has been astounding, right? People have -- everybody is at home, everybody is doing it, so that works. What does that mean for us strategically from an office footprint, location footprint perspective? We've invested wisely over the last few years, I think, to make sure everybody in the organization, I the infrastructure to enable that as well. So we're learning a lot of things from this experience, that we're using as imports to challenge current strategy, what it will mean to our strategy in the future, what it will mean in terms of customer changes. We're lobbying and questioning customers about their thoughts on it. So I think it's a bigger issue than just cost savings. They're captured in that, but also it's really strategically, how do you think about this? What other activities will this drive? How will it change the business that we work in and the way that the business operates on top of that. So we're really using this challenge as an opportunity to think harder about where we go in the future, in general terms. But Jason, questions on the cost side, what do you -- any difference in the way that we think on that?
I would just -- I mean, yes, I think Alistair is right, obviously. I would add, we are accelerating some of the things that we already saw, Sandy, and forward-bound, pulling that forward, and those are permanent- type items. And then the other thing that we hit on that we haven't talked about, and it's nothing huge, but we did take the opportunity to look at the portfolio of services right across the business, what might not be as core as perhaps it once was or things of that nature that we think will obviously help us, longer term, as we focus on the business and help us margin-wise, too, as we come out on the other side.
Our next question or comment comes from the line of Elizabeth Anderson from Evercore.
I just have a question in terms of how you're thinking, or how your conversations have been going with sponsors around virtual trials. Are people sort of receptive to that idea? Or I mean is that more of like a receptive in principle versus willing to implement now? Are there certain segments of your client base that have been more interested? Any details you could provide there would be helpful.
Okay. So I want to make sure that definitionally, we're all talking about the same thing because what we always been an element of monitoring -- well certainly, over the last few years, risk-based monitoring or efficiency based monitoring, however you want to look at it. Virtual trials are something completely different, right? Where there's a virtual trial is where there is no investigator. We refer to them as decentralized trials. So they're a different kind of subset of trials. So decentralized, kind of easier to administer the medicine, easier to do it but through telehealth, really suits kind of more chronic diseases where the patient's self -- doing their own medication at their own set of home and maybe in a real- world setting. So we already run virtual trials in that sense. Now the remote side is we're not going on to site, but the patient is still being treated by an investigative site. And I think there's been a little bit of confusion around those to the interchangeability, if you like, of the words virtual and decentralized and remote. So we're seeing receptibility at the moment from customers to go to remote trials, to remote monitoring trials during this pandemic. And the guidance coming out from regulators is kind of working around that as well what they expect to see on the virtual trials, and we already have that capability. We deliver those in more real-world settings and less complex medicines. So it's not really a customer by customer. I think all customers are interested in virtual trials and what they can bring to them. It's more about the applicability of them by therapy and by phase of the therapy rather than customers themselves. So it's kind of a definitional thing, and I think people will interchange virtual and get virtual and remote mixed together where they are actually separate things.
Yes, that's helpful. And so just to absolutely clarify, so you haven't seen like -- and none of your trials are converting from either in-person or remote to something on the virtual because that would just sort of be, from your -- the way you're positioning it is like a whole separate construct that would require a different protocol and so.
Yes. Essentially, yes. I mean, Paul, any additional thoughts on that? What -- you can do the remote and the on-site together, virtual is, like you say, something different in terms of its overall construct.
No, I mean the only thing I would add, Alistair, I think you're spot on, which is every trial is really a customized solution. It really depends on the TA you're working in. We are doing telemedicine on a number of trials. We have -- we are using clients' systems in some instances. We have multiple models that we're putting in place. But when you think about telemedicine in a lot of the TAs we work in, you're not doing a CT scan or an infusion, typically, that way. So I think we're customizing those fits for the specific client need, but we are working across all of the above and have partners that are helping us from a telemedicine perspective to do that.
Our next question or comment comes from the line of Dan Brennan from UBS.
So I just wanted to ask one kind of clarification. It's come up a few times even in the last question. So in terms of the percentage of CRAs that can get to sites, I think, Alistair, Jason, you mentioned 15%. Was that correct? In terms -- I'm just trying to level set kind of -- back to a few questions, kind of what some of your peers have talked about, which is how I think they're defining it, but I'm just trying to clarify. So 15% of -- so basically, 85% of sites are inaccessible for CRAs physically being there?
Got it. And any sense of how that changes if you look out over the course of the year, given your various planning strategies? You've got probably a good plan and a bad plan. But when you think about the middle plan, like what would that look like as you get to Q3, Q4?
Well, I think what we expect, as we said earlier, is the biggest impact throughout Q2. I think it's going to depend on local government protocols. And as they peel back the social distancing requirements, what that looks like in Q3, but we expect it to be a big increase and then big improvement as we go through Q3. Not only as kind of COVID, hopefully blows itself out or the social distancing measures take effect. But as we learn what the best routine is for a site to protect themselves and the staff, what the cleaning protocols are, et cetera, we're helping sites with that. And then by Q4, I'm hoping that we'll see a heavily reduced impact and be back to a majority of on-site work. I think some of the trials may stay as a mix of on-site and remote as well. So you can cut the number of visits down, and they can cut their exposure down by continuing to do remote a little bit longer. So I really don't have a crystal ball that tells us when we're going to be out of it and what that's going to do to overall visits. We have trend lines, like you say, we have a good scenario and a downside scenario or -- and it all relates on how quickly it peels back. But expecting to see, which I think is the same as everybody else's. But in terms of local site's ability to allow monitors back on site, that's going to be a case-by-case, side-by-side basis.
Great. And then you made some comments in the prepared remarks and then in subsequent Q&A, it's come up. But in terms of the ability to recapture what is lost here early on in the year, is the idea that it does just get pushed out? Or is there slack in the system? Obviously, patients and sites and people, it's hard to kind of accelerate things. But I'm just wondering, how do we think about, over the course of this year and then even in the next year, is there the ability to kind of accelerate some of the shift here kind a get to a point where you've caught up?
I think the catch-up will take several quarters. I don't think it's -- I think if Q2 and Q3 are down, you don't get the change orders all in place and you don't recoup all that, you don't get rid of the backlogs at site and things like that in Q4. So I think it will overall be an impact to the whole of 2020 from an operational and then revenue perspective. And then as we go through 2021, if there's no second wave, if there's no kind of reverberation of this around the world as the second wave, then I think we'll largely be caught up with trials through some point in 2021, whether that be the middle to the end, I don't know. But it doesn't all come back in the first week that we get back to work. It's a much more phased and gradual piece of that. Because sites only have a certain capacity for patients even if there is a big backlog of patients. When those sites reopen, there's going to be a prioritization of which monitors can go back out in site. Because we all -- a lot of us use similar sites. So they're not going to want 10 DRAs showing up on day 1, it's going to be a phasing. So it'll take a while to catch back up.
Our next question or comment comes from the line of Robert Jones from Goldman Sachs.
This is Jack Rogoff on for Bob. So I'm trying to understand the range of outcomes embedded in the 13% to 14% margin range. I guess, we've made meaningful progress in regaining physical access to sites by the fourth quarter. And if commercial decisions were still delayed in the fourth quarter, would you still be able to maintain the range?
Yes. Jack, it's Jason here. Yes. So we -- as I mentioned a little bit earlier, Jack, we've gone on the cost side, heavier on the front end with temporary and permanent items. And we have a certain percentage of the cost base that we're targeting in quarter 3 and quarter 4. And -- I'm sorry, quarter 2, quarter 3 and quarter 4. And then on top of that, we've got about 50% more identified that we could pull in if we need to by extending items or adding more permanent items. So with that level of visibility and what's in front of us, the range -- we feel confident in getting in that range based on the range of outcomes we've looked at in our internal models via those items.
Got it. That's helpful. And then just following up on the complex disease area that you talked about having high exposure to. I'm curious what the split is for you between hospital-based sites and outpatient sites for the trials that you're running.
That's a good question, Paul. I don't know if I've got the stats at hand. We can see [indiscernible].
But I think given our pipeline and what we have therapeutically, I would say likely that it will have a lot more hospital based. But I have to go back and cut it. I haven't cut it that way.
I'll catch up with that.
Our next question or comment comes from the line of Stephen Baxter from Wolfe Research.
So first, I wanted to ask about your efforts to add incremental preferred provider relationships with large pharma. Obviously, we're all working remote right now. It's hard to say how quickly things will sort of get back to normal. So for the companies that you would have expected to be able to pitch this year, I guess, how are they handling their process? Are they pushing out their own decision-making? Or are they extending their current providers on a short-term basis, extending them for something more like a full contract pool? I'd love to get a better sense of what you're hearing on this. And then just as my second question, just thinking about headcount. I guess, how do you think your year-end headcount will compare to where it would have been if we never had the outbreak?
Okay. So I think some of those large pharma processors, we've seen them continue to run, and we are actively engaged with them. It's a bit different, obviously, not being able to press the flesh, but we're doing the virtual pressing of flesh and continuing to move those processes forward. I think it will take a bit longer. They might have done it if we were able to get face-to-face, but we're not. We don't have any concerns that those things are not progressing as we expected them to. So -- and then in overall headcount, we've got hiring freeze on at the moment, same as everybody else. That really looks at billable -- sorry, nonbillable, and then looks at -- on the billable side, we're always going to be interested in talent. We're always going to be looking for talent. We have been building a significant backlog. We've had great growth. We're going to need to continue fueling that with talent as we move forward. But we are obviously being very cautious and making sure that we keep the cost side of the business under control, while revenue's suppress a little bit. So I think we'll probably come out of the year with roughly what we've got now, but it depends on how quickly it all comes back. I mean if we see a strong, solid, resilient rebound in Q3 and we need to get the staff in for Q4, we'll be doing that, and we'll be at a higher number. So -- but it just again depends on that -- the shape of that curve.
Our next question or comment comes from the line of Donald Hooker from KeyBanc.
Great. Obviously, this has gone on for a while, so a lot of my questions have been asked and answered. One area, maybe sort of as a side question or half the floor. I had been interested in the past in your -- you had a medication adherence data business, which I think would be a pretty timely asset right now of being able to sort of digitally connect with pharmacies and whatnot. I think, you picked that up as part of inVentiv Health. There have been some hiccups in that business a few quarters back. Have those hiccups, the revenue headwinds there, kind of reversed? And maybe just in a -- briefly, what is the state of that particular business unit?
Yes. I'll pass it over to Michelle for the detail. I mean, some of those historic hiccups were on the customer side, where I think they had a data breach or something like that, which shut one of the big programs down. So we're kind of on the receiving end of that one. But like you say, I think there's a lot of effort going into tracking and tracing and data at the moment. So it is an interesting business right now. Michelle?
Sure. And I'll let Jason chime in if I miss anything. So it was a headwind in 2019, as you recall, for a variety of reasons, many of which Alistair already discussed. Back on track this year versus budget. And we are actually finding a lot of interest, as you can imagine, if you look at the data around TRXs on chronic care medications, oral medications. Through the end of March, we see that, actually, those are the prescriptions that are holding up pretty well. And we're getting a lot of data from those pharmacies
CEO & Director around the importance of keeping people on medications right now, right? I mean, when you think about telehealth and the fact that a lot of patients are choosing to communicate with their customers over video versus in-person in certain geographies, the importance of keeping patients on medications right now, especially in chronic diseases, is critically important. And we are seeing a lot of interest from our customers in discussions around how do we continue to do that. Because you don't want the next wave of health crisis to be that. Once we get beyond COVID-19, patients who were chronically -- taken chronic medications are now -- well, we lost their medications, and then we have new issues, right, based on them not being compliant. So absolutely been very valuable through this time. And Jason, I don't know if you want to add anything on the financials.
Just to say, year-over-year, it's still, as we outlined, it's still a drag in terms of performance year-over- year. But as Michelle alluded to, we were quite pleased with how we performings in quarter 1 relative to our budget.
Our next question or comment comes from the line of Patrick Donnelly from Citi.
Alistair, maybe one, just on the virtual trial side, you've talked about a decent amount on the call here. In your conversations with customers, do you feel like there could be an inflection point here where you see a bigger shift towards the virtual trial model on the other side of COVID? And then if so, what's your guys' positioning there relative to peers to capture some share?
Yes. Yes, I think it's a really good question. I think that goes back to what have we learned from COVID. So we've been stuck in this gradual move over to risk-based monitoring and the parts of that, that require remote monitoring instead of face-to-face. The real kind of handbrake on that has been the clarity from the regulators. I'm Chairman of ACRO this year as well and with Cyndi Verst and Steve Collins' help and the rest of the team, what we've been trying to do is make sure that there's a linkage between what the regulator asks for and our ability to execute it operationally, across the industry. So pharma, CRO and regulator working together on an operational solution that's doable. The handbrake on it has been a little bit, more than anything else, is the lack of clarity. When the regulator says adequate monitoring, what does adequate mean? How does that relate to remote versus on site, et cetera, et cetera? So as we get suggestions and the solutions that we roll out, which could be remote or virtual trials, et cetera. And I think that's the push. This is part of the push that, that process is needed. So I'm optimistic that we'll see more of a shift to more remote monitoring. I think the quality is just as good. I think it helps drive the cost down a little bit. You get higher throughput from people because they're just not on planes traveling, you get that utilization of.
In terms of where we sit for remote, I think Paul's comments speak for themselves in the fact that we were able to shift to remote pretty quickly. And then on the virtual side, we use our dynamic assembly model for that. We're able to plug any data into any system. We've run several virtual trials with different systems, different platforms. They don't all fit exactly what you'd -- each platform in and of itself is not the solution to every problem that comes through or every challenge the customer comes with, which is why we like to have optionality around the different systems and the different platforms we deploy. So I think we're very well positioned. We'll be at the front of that. If we're not in the front of it already, we'll be very much at the front of it in terms of partnering with those organizations. And there are several of them out there. It's like 15 years ago when EDC took off, right? You had 1,000 different options and about 3 of them worked. That's the virtual trial space at the moment as well.
Okay, that's helpful. And then a quick one for Jason. I know you've talked about the commercial side a decent amount here on the margins. I tend to think of that as a lot heavier on the variable cost side. Can you just talk through the cost structure? If revenues do pull back significantly, how nimble can you be specifically in that segment on the cost side?
Yes, Patrick. Yes. So the businesses are similar in terms of the variable versus fixed on the cost of sales. Commercial is probably 95%, and the cost of sales is variable. And on the SG&A side, given the profile of that with the reps, and most of the headcount being out and some on customer systems and SOPs among ours, the SG&A load there is pretty favorable, too, from that perspective. So I feel pretty good, and the business does a good job of adjusting that as needed. management for any closing remarks.
Thank you. Well, thanks, everybody, and a sincere thanks also go to the entire Syneos Health team for all they've done and all they are doing in the face of these unprecedented conditions. In all, we're very pleased with our overall performance in the first quarter and with how our organization has responded to this to serve our customers and our communities throughout this time. We remain very confident in our long-term momentum and market position and our focus on protecting the health and safety of our colleagues and mitigating the impacts of COVID-19 on the business. We look forward to continuing to build on the momentum of the last several quarters as the environment normalizes. So thank you very much. Thanks, ladies and gents, for your attendance today and for your interest and investment in our company. Please be safe. Take care of yourselves. Have a great day and be good. Thank you.
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for participating in today's conference. This concludes the program. You may now disconnect. Everyone, have a wonderful day.
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for standing by, and welcome to the Teligent, Inc. Fourth Quarter and Full Year 2019 Results Conference Call. [Operator Instructions] Please be advised that today's conference is being recorded.
Except for historical facts, the statements in this presentation as well as oral statements or other written statements made or to be made by Teligent Inc. are forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 and involve risks and uncertainties. For example, without limitation, statements about the company's anticipated growth and future operations, the current or expected market size for its products, the success of our current or future product offerings and the research and development efforts and the company's ability to file for and obtain U.S. Food and Drug Administration approvals for future products are forward-looking statements.
Forward-looking statements are merely the company's current predictions of future events. The statements are inherently uncertain, and actual results could differ materially from the statements made herein. There is no assurance that the company will achieve the sales levels that will make its operations profitable, or that FDA filings and approvals will be completed and obtained as anticipated.
For a description of additional risks and uncertainties, please refer to the company's filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, including its latest annual report on Form 10-K and its latest quarterly report on Form 10-Q. The company assumes no obligation to update its forward-looking statements to reflect new information and developments.
[Operator Instructions] I would now like to hand the conference over to your speaker today, Mr. Damian Finio, Teligent Corporate's Chief Financial Officer. Thank you. Please go ahead, sir.
Thank you, Daniel, and good morning, everyone. I am Damian Finio, the Chief Financial Officer of Teligent. I am joined on this morning's call by our new President and CEO, Tim Sawyer. Before introducing you to Tim, on behalf of all employees of Teligent, I wanted to take a moment to thank our former President and CEO, Jason Grenfell-Gardner, for his vision and significant contributions made to this organization.
Now this morning, I'm excited to introduce you to our new President and CEO, Tim Sawyer. He brings over 26 years of experience in the pharmaceutical industry, having held a variety of senior executive positions in general management, marketing and sales. Prior to joining Teligent, Tim spent 16 years at Barr Laboratories, eventually serving as Executive Vice President, Global Generic Sales and Marketing, where he led a team of nearly 2,000 employees in 25 countries. Subsequently, Tim held positions such as Senior Vice President, Corporate Strategic Development at Mylan and President Retail Medicine at 1-800-Doctors, Inc. Most recently, Tim served as Chief Executive Officer of Geritrex, a manufacturer and marketer of generic over the counter pharmaceuticals.
Since Tim joined on February 5, his leadership style has been consistent, and it's no surprise he's had success in this industry. He's a great listener, adept at building relationships quickly, crystal clear with his expectations and does not hesitate in holding individuals accountable. We are confident in his ability to lead this organization through the next phase of our evolution.
And with that introduction, I will hand the mic over to Tim. Tim?
Thanks, Damian. Good morning, and thanks for that kind introduction. I truly appreciate the time you've spent helping me get up to speed quickly, thank you. I'm Tim Sawyer, the new President and CEO of
Teligent. I'm delighted to be here with you this morning to discuss the Q4 and full year 2019 results for Teligent. It's been 5 months since Teligent's last call with investors, so needless to say, Damian and I have a lot of topics to cover this morning. I'd like to start by thanking the Teligent employees, Board of Directors and the many stakeholders, including shareholders, creditors, customers and vendors for their warm welcome, thank you. I look forward to working with you as we drive Teligent's business forward.
During my first 8 weeks with Teligent, I've been very clear with all of these stakeholders about my top 3 priorities. First, resolving the Warning Letter issued by the FDA in November of 2019. Second, passing the pre-approval inspection of our new injectable manufacturing facility in Buena, New Jersey. And third, managing cash flow.
Before walking you through these priorities in more detail, I'd also like to highlight that I believe in the company's TICO, topicals, injectables, complex and ophthalmic strategy, my plan is grounded on efficiently executing this strategy, not fundamentally changing it. I've worked in the pharmaceutical industry for nearly 30 years. I've seen strategies, companies, people and products come and go. But regardless of the ever-shifting headwinds this industry has faced for decades, the companies that succeed know how to execute. And to execute, you need to build an organization, hyper-focused on delivering an uninterrupted supply of high-quality, low-cost pharmaceutical products to its customers. My plan is to execute the TICO strategy, not change it.
Let's talk about our first priority, resolving the FDA Warning Letter. There are 2 phases to the Warning Letter remediation. Phase 1 is a physical audit of our facility conducted by a third-party auditor. This phase is intended to show that the current processes, procedures and policies of the company are compliant for pharmaceutical products. This phase has been completed, and the report was submitted to the FDA. Phase II is the documentation audit and review. This ensures that all products on the market that are within expiry are verified as safe, effective and fit for use. This phase is nearly complete, and we expect to file our final response to the agency in the coming days. Although ultimately, only the FDA can decide to lift a Warning Letter, I feel confident in the company's remediation efforts led by our enhanced quality team.
Regarding the second priority, passing the pre-approval inspection, we engaged the third-party auditor previously mentioned to conduct a mock audit of our prior approval supplement application and the Buena facility, which included the new sterile facility. At the conclusion of the audit, we reviewed the findings, and our quality and operational teams have worked diligently to address their observations. We believe we are prepared for the FDA inspection. Our original intent was to use our ranitidine product to trigger this PAI. However, in light of the FDA action on ranitidine last week, including requesting the market withdrawal of all ranitidine products, this is unlikely, and we will shift to our next injectable product to trigger the PAI. This product is expected to be filed shortly after the Warning Letter is submitted in the coming days.
Again, although it's ultimately up to the agency to decide, our preference and intent is to work with the FDA to perform a combined inspection in Buena that covers both what's necessary to lift the Warning
Letter and approve our sterile facility for commercial production.
Managing cash flows has been and will continue to be a priority under my leadership. The organization was successful in reducing discretionary spending and redeploying the savings to fund more investment in our quality department previously. Cost savings, however, are an integral part of a generic company, and we will continue to focus on savings that impact our cost of goods to enable Teligent to remain cost competitive in the marketplace.
Another area of focus has been on the company's capital structure. As you'll hear from Damian, he has led the team in retiring, issuing and swapping convertible bonds in addition to executing amendments on our revolving credit facility and term loan with Ares Capital. Efforts to reduce costs will continue, and the capital structure will continue to evolve.
We also continue to work with our development partner and the FDA to address the second complete response letter received on our complex drug application.
And finally, we continue to work with Leerink on the noncore asset divestiture process initiated in October of 2019. We are progressing, and we'll provide updates as appropriate.
At this point, let me turn the call over to Damian, so he can provide more insight to our actual and projected financial performance and a few other important topics. At the conclusion of Damian's remarks, I'll share some final thoughts before opening it up to your questions. Damian?
Thanks, Tim. Our last earnings call was in November of 2019. So I would like to spend a few more minutes than usual in order to provide you with a full update on 4 important topics. Number one, actual and projected financial performance; number two, key highlights to the Ares loan amendments announced earlier today; three, liquidity; and finally four, our listing status with NASDAQ.
So let's start with the first topic, actual and projected financial performance. Consolidated net revenues for the fourth quarter of 2019 were $16.7 million, bringing full year 2019 revenues to $65.9 million or 4% short of our last full year guidance. Fourth quarter revenues were dampened by failure to supply fees of $0.8 million, $0.4 million of which were incurred in Canada. And although difficult to quantify, it's reasonable to assume that past supply disruptions coupled with the noncore asset divestiture process initiated on October 1 and the Warning Letter issued by the FDA in late November 2019, combined to dampen demand for our products. As we work through these challenges, efforts to smooth the ongoing process of balancing supply and demand will be further emphasized. And with Tim's experience and leadership in this area, I remain confident that we will get there, absent any COVID-19-related business interruptions.
Gross margin for the fourth quarter was 12%, a 3,100 basis point decline from the 43% realized as of year-to-date September 30, 2019. Unfavorable customer and product mix accounted for 1,700 of those 3,100 basis points decline in the fourth quarter. Price erosion accounted for another 1,000 basis points, while incremental inventory reserves accounted for the remaining portion of the quarter-on-quarter decline.
Fourth quarter total operating expenses were consistent with previously reported September 30 year-to- date results. Specific to product development and research expenses, the incremental expense realized in the fourth quarter was driven by a $0.9 million noncash write-off of a prepaid asset relating to a delayed TEP transfer between 2 of our injectable contract manufacturers.
Specific to selling, general and administrative expenses, we continue to incur legal fees as we vigorously defend our position in ongoing litigation. However, for a company of our size, legal fees of $1 million in the fourth quarter and $3.7 million for full year 2019 are material. As reported in today's press release, adjusted EBITDA for the fourth quarter was a loss of $4.3 million. That said, consistent with what I described earlier, this loss includes the $0.8 million of failure to supply penalties recorded as an offset to revenue, the $0.9 million write-off recorded in product development and research expenses and the continuing legal defense costs.
In terms of full year performance, the company posted $65.9 million of revenue, which is consistent with 2018. Despite the less than expected performance in the fourth quarter of 2019, year-on-year gross profit improved by $0.7 million or 3%, while gross margin improved 200 basis points from 34% to 36%.
Fourth quarter financial performance led to a shortfall in our goal of forging the path to profitability in 2019, as we posted adjusted EBITDA equivalent to a $0.2 million loss for the full year.
We filed for a 10-K extension on Monday, March 30. The extension provides us with an incremental 15 days. Additional time was needed to execute the loan amendments with Ares and as a resulting and required subsequent event disclosures to Form 10-K. We intend to file by the end of this week, but certainly before the extended deadline of April 14.
Lastly, in terms of projected financial performance, we will not be providing 2020 financial guidance on today's call. There are several major variables weighing on our ability to accurately project and deliver our 2020 financial targets. Aside from the impact COVID-19 might have on our manufacturing capability and/ or patient demand for our products, Teligent is also operating under a Warning Letter. As a consequence of that Warning Letter, our filed topical ANDAs will not be approved, and the injectable pre-approval inspection will happen either in parallel or after Warning Letter resolution. Variables such as COVID-19, a Warning Letter, pre-approval inspection, complex drug application and the noncore asset divestiture process are material and not entirely within our control. For all of these reasons, we will not be providing 2020 guidance today. However, we do anticipate reporting an approximate 50% decline in first quarter 2020 revenues.
Looking beyond the first quarter of 2020, assuming successful resolution of the material events mentioned, we would expect to see financial performance improvement over the remainder of the calendar year.
This leads me to the second of the 4 topics I'd like to cover, and that is providing key highlights to the loan amendments announced earlier today. Both our actual 2019 financial performance and medium-term projections were reviewed and discussed in detail with our secured creditor, Ares Capital. As an outcome of those collaborative discussions, we executed amendments to both our first lien revolver and second lien term loan agreements on April 6, 2020. These amendments serve to eliminate the original fourth quarter 2019 financial covenants, while significantly reducing the financial performance required to meet financial covenants going forward. For the 4 quarters of 2020, the company must record trailing 12-month net revenues of $59 million, $55 million, $54 million and $57 million, respectively. Beginning with the quarter ended March 31, 2021, the company must report trailing 12-month adjusted EBITDA performance in excess of a range beginning with $10 million, increasing to $14.5 million for the last quarter, just prior to loan maturity.
Also, the calculation of adjusted EBITDA per the amendment now includes certain add-backs, including, but not limited to legal expenses within certain limitations. In addition, the amendments provide the company with the option to continue picking or deferring cash interest paid on the term loan for an additional year, if the company is successful in resolving the Warning Letter and passing the injectable pre- approval inspection by December 2020. If only one of those items occurs by this time, then the company may still elect to pay interest in kind during 2021, but only from the time the second condition has been satisfied. Beyond December 2021, a portion of interest on the loans accruing at a rate of 4.25% per annum may continue to be paid in kind.
Although our preference is to generate the operating cash flow needed to service our debt to avoid the compounding effect of picking interest, this provision improves the company's ability to maintain the liquidity needed to execute our strategy. In consideration of the relaxed covenants and potential to extend the pick option, the cost of capital increased. The amended interest rate on the first lien revolving credit facility is LIBOR plus 5.5% with a 1.5% LIBOR floor. The new rate is about 100 basis points more than at loan inception in December 2018 or 225 basis points more than the rate just prior to executing the amendment. The difference between the increment at loan inception versus today relates to the 15-month decline in the LIBOR. The amended interest rate on the second lien term loan is LIBOR plus 13%, also with the 1.5% LIBOR floor. The new rate is about 350 basis points more than at loan inception or 475 basis points more than the rate just prior to executing the amendment. Again, the difference between the incremental loan inception versus today relates to the 15-month decline in LIBOR.
Lastly, Ares was granted approximately 5.4 million warrants at the cost of $0.01 per warrant, equivalent to just under 10% of the outstanding shares of the company at December 31, 2019. More detail on these loan amendments will be made available to the public when we file Form 8-K after market close today.
Going forward, by resolving the Warning Letter, passing the pre-approval inspection and consistently achieving positive financial results, COVID-19 aside, our credit profile should improve, and we will be in a better position to work with Ares Capital, our existing bondholders and potentially new creditors to address our capital structure and thus reduce our cost of capital.
Having reviewed the key highlights of the loan amendments, let's move to topics 3 and 4, our liquidity. As you heard Tim mention in his opening remarks, one of our top priorities is to manage cash flows, and I will add, particularly in the second quarter of 2020. Given the impact COVID-19 might have on our business and less anticipated cash collections from customers as a consequence of the decline in first quarter 2020 revenues, available cash balances will decline over the course of this quarter. We issued Series B Bank 2023 convertible bonds in the fourth quarter of 2019. We used $29.3 million of gross proceeds from those bonds, plus a final $10 million draw from our term loan with Ares to cover fees associated with the capital raise, pay down current liabilities, retire $13.1 million of December 2019 convertible bonds and provide the company with further liquidity. With the increase in current assets and decline in current liabilities associated with this bond issuance and term loan draw, working capital at December 31, 2019, increased to $45 million. This represents a $28.4 million improvement in working capital from what we reported at September 30, 2019. More specifically, we ended the year with $15.5 million of cash on the balance sheet.
In order to preserve cash, we will continue to pick or defer cash interest payments on our Series B May 2023 convertible bonds and the term loan with Ares. Keeping in mind, the company now has the potential to extend this option for another year, if we are able to resolve the Warning Letter and pass pre-approval inspection by December 2020. We continue to pay regular interest on our Ares revolving credit facility as well as our Series A May 2023 convertible bonds. With the loan amendments announced today, Teligent's quarterly 2020 cash interest payable to Ares will increase by about $150,000. This increase relates solely to the estimated 225 basis point increase on the revolving credit facility. And our next semiannual interest payment to bondholders is $1.6 million and is payable in May 2020.
Lastly, we, like many other companies with less than 500 employees, are exploring and have applied for COVID-19 relief made available by recently passed state and federal legislation in the form of payroll- related reimbursements and low-cost small business association loans.
Allow me to switch gears to the last topic, our NASDAQ listing status and potential for a reverse split of our common stock. In June 2019, we received a delisting notice from NASDAQ due to our share price trading below $1 for 30 consecutive trading days. The notice specified that our share price must trade above $1 per share for 10 consecutive trading days prior to December 2, 2019, in order to prevent our common stock from being delisted. On December 2, 2019, we had yet to regain compliance. We requested a second 100-day -- 180-day extension, NASDAQ denied our request, and the company chose to file for an appeal. The company was granted a hearing date for the end of January 2020. Subsequent to the appeal hearing, shareholders approved a reverse stock split in the range of any whole number ranging from 5 and 10 to 1 and soon after, we were informed by NASDAQ that our appeal was denied. In light of the COVID-19 impact on the markets, NASDAQ set a deadline to regain compliance of June 1, 2020. Although possible, it is not probable that business performance alone, particularly as we navigate through COVID-19 related challenges, will be the catalyst to increase the share price above $1. If our shares are delisted from the NASDAQ, we would be in default of the nonfinancial covenant required by our senior credit facilities and convertible bonds, and we would need to seek a waiver or seek new capital, thus leaving a reverse stock split as the only remaining option to prevent this occurrence. While we believe that the reverse stock split will ultimately increase our share price above $1 for the required 10 consecutive trading days, we can provide no assurances this will be the case.
With that, let me now turn the call back over to Tim for his final remarks before we move to the question- and-answer portion of today's call. Tim?
Thanks, Damian. I can confirm my first 2 months here at Teligent have been exciting. As Damian and I highlighted, the company has some headwinds. However, the untapped potential of this company is evident, and I'm thrilled to be here and confident that I have the management team and employee base needed to execute efficiently to achieve our objectives.
We hope that you and your families are safe and in good health. Our teams here at Teligent, particularly those on-site working in Buena, inspire me every day. Their dedication, commitment and loyalty to both this company and our customers and patients is admirable. During this pandemic, we have taken many extra steps to protect our employees, and I'm glad to report that no Teligent employee has tested positive for COVID-19.
Manufacturing in Buena and distribution from our third-party logistics provider has been thankfully uninterrupted. We are recognized as an essential business in each municipality and country where we are located. And as such, we are operating as normal. We continue to closely monitor our supply chain to ensure we have the materials necessary to produce our products. To date, we have not experienced any significant delays in production, thanks to the commitment of our operators.
We're proud to have a U.S. manufacturing facility for our products. We look forward to utilizing its expanded capacity upon approval from the FDA. With that, I will now ask Daniel to open up the call to questions. Thank you.
[Operator Instructions] Our first question comes from Matt Hewitt with Craig-Hallum Capital Group.
Tim, welcome. Nice to hear from you this morning. I've got a few questions. Maybe the first that you could start with is, what attracted you to this opportunity? Where do you see the near-term low-hanging fruit? And how quickly do you think you can capitalize on that?
Thanks. So I think a couple of things. First, what attracted me to the opportunity obviously, you heard a bunch about headwinds and things today, but what attracted me to the opportunity specifically, is the product portfolio and the injectables transition that the company had was under -- that was undergoing at the time that I joined. I think injectables are a critical component to the medical treatment protocol. I think that they are an area where there is lots of opportunity, particularly as you've seen in the marketplace with drug shortages, if you track that area. So I think that was very, very interesting to me. And I think that the ability of this company to launch into that market is really exciting. So that's the first part. The second part, what do I see as low-hanging fruit? I think the first thing that we did and are doing is improving our product supply. So one of the things that this company was burdened with previously was, they were unable to be a reliable supplier for customers. And customers demanded that in this marketplace, not being an intermittent supplier, and that causes lumps in your sales, lumps in your earnings. And so we've undertaken a comprehensive plan to overhaul our supply chain and our processes for how we work and forecast and predict our business going forward. So that's -- the first thing is to become a reliable supplier for our customers, and that will pay off in dividends when our customers see us as such and are able to rely on us day in and day out when we become their first tier call when they're looking for new products. So I think that's an area of low-hanging fruit for us. And I think I might have forgotten what your -- third part of your question was.
No. That's perfect. You touched on one of the things. So as you look at getting the injectables facility up and approved by the FDA, one of the opportunities with the first drug that was submitted was that it was the -- or to trigger the inspection, is that your plan with that second submission is to find an opportunity where it's a drug that either is currently on shortage or has the history of being on shortage? Or maybe even there's an opportunity within something within the coronavirus treatments where there's a need and a demand that would trigger the FDA to maybe come in sooner rather than later?
Yes. So good question. So what we're looking at, the second product, obviously, will be filed here shortly. It doesn't have a shortage currently. However, as a part of an NDA and it's a pre-approval supplement, as I mentioned, what's going -- what will happen is there's a statutory time line that the FDA has to come in and inspect for, so -- because they have to respond to the agent, to the supplement within certain number of months. So number one, this product allows us to push a faster track on that. Number two, we are always -- and what you mentioned is important, we are always looking for opportunities to accelerate the time line. And if there are COVID-19 related ways to do that, we will pursue them rigorously to work with the agency to get -- to accelerate that approval for the facility.
Okay. And then -- and I don't know if you know the answer to this, but I thought I'd ask it anyway. Given the situation with the country right now, are there -- are you hearing anecdotally any issues with the FDA conducting inspections? I know that they're considered obviously an essential business, and they're still going to work. But is that slowing down the inspection process in any way that you've heard?
They have made a couple of announcements at the agency about delaying inspections of certain particular types. We believe that -- quite frankly, we believe that with what's going on with this pandemic, the fact that we are a U.S. manufacturing facility located in New Jersey, as we talked about on the call, that we would want to -- that there is an incentive for them to approve domestic manufacturing capacity. And so we believe that they will want to do that with us, and we'll give them every reason to approve us. So we're going to move forward quickly, but we think that there's an incentive for them to do that.
Understood. And then you actually just touched on another question I had, maybe just elaborate a little bit further. Given what's happened regarding the coronavirus, COVID-19, and what appears to be at least the initial stages of a desire to bring more manufacturing back into the country versus China, India, whatnot, how does that set you up? Let's assume we get through the headwinds over the next year, get through these inspections and what not, but how does that set you up going forward given your domestic capacity?
I think it sets us up well. Obviously, we are right in the wheelhouse there, being a domestic manufacturer. I think it sets us up for the potential for success. And while we don't know exactly what -- it's awful hard to predict exactly what the FDA or what, quite frankly, the government will do, but we feel good about being a domestic manufacturer, and we feel good about the opportunities that, that's going to present for us in the future.
Ladies and gentlemen, this concludes our question-and-answer session. I would now like to turn the call back over to Tim Sawyer, President and CEO, for any closing remarks.
All right. Thank you all for your time and attention this morning. That concludes our call. Have a great day.
Ladies and gentlemen, this concludes today's conference call. Thank you for participating. You may now disconnect.
Hello, and welcome to the Greenbrier Companies' Second Quarter of Fiscal Year 2020 Earnings Conference Call. [Operator Instructions] At the request of the Greenbrier Companies, this conference call is being recorded for instant replay purposes. At this time, I would like to turn the conference over to Mr. Justin Roberts, Vice President and Treasurer. Mr. Roberts, you may begin.
Thank you, Misty. Good morning, everyone, and welcome to our second quarter of fiscal 2020 conference call. On today's call, I'm joined by Greenbrier's Chairman and CEO, Bill Furman; Lorie Tekorius, President and COO; and Adrian Downes, Senior Vice President and CFO. They will provide an update on Greenbrier's near-term priorities as we manage through the COVID-19 pandemic, and then we will discuss the results for the second quarter. Following our introductory remarks, we will open up the call for questions.
In addition to the press release issued this morning, which includes supplemental data, additional financial information and key metrics can be found in a slide presentation posted today on the IR section of our website.
Matters discussed on today's conference call include forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Throughout our discussion today, we will describe some of the important factors that could cause Greenbrier's actual results in 2020 and beyond to differ materially from those expressed in any forward-looking statements made by or on behalf of Greenbrier.
And with that, I'll pass it over to Bill.
Thank you, Justin, and good morning, everyone. As we begin, I want to take a moment to extend good wishes for the health of everyone on the line with us today. I also call out the work of the many health professionals, emergency responders, government officials and individuals who are on the front lines battling this pandemic and those in our Armed Forces and National Guard around the world and here in America. Finally, I thank all the Greenbrier employees in our factories, offices and at home, each now operating under essential industry status.
The world is not only in a severe health crisis, but obviously, an economic crisis affecting businesses in hand allows us to protect liquidity and maneuver in a way others in -- other industries and other businesses cannot under current circumstances.
We're now operating under 2 essential priorities: number one, to provide for the safety and security of our workforce; and number two, to provide for the liquidity and economic well-being of the enterprise and its shareholders.
In the face of this pandemic, management priorities and behavior immediately shifted to the extraordinary challenges at hand. We quickly implemented contingency plans and assembled incident response teams. We assessed the risk to our business in real-time and are taking swift actions to ensure Greenbrier is defensively positioned to manage through a period that presents a range of unknown and unknowable challenges.
We are safely operating, and I emphasize safely operating all our manufacturing and essential service sites, including those sites that manage over 1/4 of industry railcars in the United States and North America. Greenbrier's operations constitute essential infrastructure and essential businesses as defined by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security and other U.S. and international agency -- agencies, including all stay-at-home orders issued in the jurisdictions where we operate at home and abroad.
Greenbrier supports operations vital for the national transportation system, the Department of Defense and other federal agencies. We perform our functions under the statutory and regulatory authority of the Department of Transportation, Surface Transportation Board, the Federal Railroad Administration and under the Jones Act in our marine operations.
Accordingly, Greenbrier will help maintain the delivery of vital goods, including food, medical supplies and fuel to communities in the United States and in all the nations that we supply around the world. We will keep our nations and those nations smoothly functioning in the railroad system.
Along with the welfare of our employees, we are determined to protect the economic well-being of the enterprise during unprecedented market and economic conditions. As discussed in our earnings release today, we are laser-focused on liquidity. Our goal is to produce $1 billion in available, reliable liquidity within the remaining 5 months of our fiscal year ending in August of 2020.
Before the onset of the pandemic, we had already begun to reduce the size of our manufacturing footprint due to anticipated lower levels of railcar demand and reduced aftermarket activity. Adjustments to production and staffing levels that began in September of last year continued into the second and third quarter as we idled excess capacity in North American manufacturing facilities, largely in Mexico as well as at Greenbrier Rail Services locations.
Since we began this initiative, we have adjusted global operations through workforce reductions equal to approximately 20% of Greenbrier's total global workforce. These reductions now exceed 3,500 workers. Yesterday, we took steps which would add another 200 workers over time.
Our colleagues who left us this fiscal year are people who each made important contributions to our success. Many have spent their entire careers in this business. They are leaving us through no fault of their own. Each affected employee is a person with a name and a family. This is a fact we never forget.
We recognize that this is a period of shared sacrifice. As a result, I have taken a voluntary immediate reduction in my salary of $250,000. And for our Board of Directors, each has voluntarily reduced their cash compensation. We have frozen pay increases for members of management. Moreover, cash and earnings will automatically flow from curtailed bonus payments if we do not meet targeted performance metrics and along with the discretionary reduction that I or the Compensation Committee of the Board of Directors can request. All that remains to be seen, but it is an automatic relief valve for difficult times baked into a company that is well-seasoned in dealing with difficult times in a cyclical business.
This is not our first rodeo. Greenbrier's business is flexible enough to quickly adapt to changing market conditions. Our franchise is strong and we hold the position as the #1 or #2 players in 3 core markets: demonstrated by the fact that half of this quarter's earnings were generated from abroad -- orders -- I'm not -- not earnings, but orders.
And of that half, about 1,000 cars are to be built in North America by a good customer in the Gulf Cooperative (sic) [ Cooperation ] Council. We have a strong experienced management team. Greenbrier, again, has navigated through difficult markets in the past. Historically, we've come out stronger as a result of our combined efforts. Not only did we recover, but we transformed and dramatically increased the scale of our business through hard work, focus, execution and diversification of our revenue stream.
Although this is a stressful time no matter how the remainder of this year plays out, we know our role in the transportation industry remains vital. Beyond layoffs and other obvious reductions, we're committed to take aggressive actions to shrink Greenbrier's cost profile, its balance sheet -- to improve its balance sheet. And Lorie and Adrian will speak more to this a little later.
Based on our current backlog, we were left with very little open production capacity for the remainder of both the fiscal and the calendar year. At Gunderson, our marine backlog extends through the fiscal year and the calendar year.
Our backlog production -- current production rate stretches into 2021 and beyond. A large multiyear manufacturing backlog of railcar units provides one source of stability in difficult times as we operate our facilities. These long-term customers are very reliable and have virtually never wavered in fulfilling commitments even if they have to, at times, put cars in storage. All that provides resilience and a bridge to industry dynamics and economic conditions improve.
In addition to the liquidity goals I mentioned, we have stress tested Greenbrier's balance sheet to our ensure -- to ensure our liquidity, and we have run very many scenarios to look at worst case. While we have suspended earnings guidance, we expect to remain profitable.
We do not know nor can anyone know how this crisis will evolve and resolve. Today, this is the biggest risk we all face together. Scenarios may emerge that we cannot reasonably anticipate. But we are confident we're managing those factors within our control, and we're also to manage others through the worst of times. This means we are prepared to adapt to the new economic realities. We'll take the difficult and necessary actions to protect Greenbrier's economic base, preserve its financial stability, focus on our core business, remove essential (sic) [ non-essential ] activities and restore shareholder value for years to come.
Now over to you, Lorie, for your comments.
Thank you, Bill. Good morning, everyone, and thank you for joining us. I'll briefly provide some additional detail on the quarter, although I have to admit that February 29, the end of our quarter, seemed like a lifetime ago. The world has shifted very quickly, and we've pivoted to respond to the shifting global landscape.
Over the last 6 months, we've been rationalizing production capacity and overhead in response to anticipated levels of new freight railcar demand and reduced aftermarket activity. Demand has weakened due to macroeconomic conditions, including trade disputes; faster train speeds resulting from the implementation of PSR; and significantly lower freight rail loadings, which have dropped sequentially for almost 15 months in nearly all commodity categories.
The industry remains supported by a backlog of over 51,000 railcars, but all builders in North America have taken steps to slow production lines in 2020. It's important to note that these conditions were present, and we were adjusting capacity prior to the COVID-19 pandemic and the collapse in global oil markets. We continue to adjust operations as needed to ensure the long-term health of Greenbrier.
And as a brief recap to the quarter, deliveries this quarter were 4,500 railcars, and we received orders for approximately 8,500 units valued over $815 million. These orders originating from international sources international commercial effort for a customer in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and will be built in and service the North American market.
Our backlog worldwide remained strong at 30,800 units valued at $3.2 billion. Operating performance at our ARI manufacturing facilities improved in the quarter. And our North American manufacturing group continued to perform profitably, producing high-quality railcars safely even as production rates were adjusted and demand declined.
Our European and our Brazilian operations performed as expected in Q2, and order activity was strong. Notably, we received the first multiyear order in Brazil in many years. And both our European and Brazilian operations are benefiting from some rightsizing that we executed in fiscal 2019.
The continued improvement in our repair operations is a reflection of the remedial actions taken over the last 18 months. The Wheels & Parts operations benefited from their higher seasonal volumes, although volumes were pressured compared to past winters. And our leasing revenue in the quarter included externally sourced railcar syndication activity. And as a reminder, this activity causes leasing's gross margin percentage to be lower as a percentage of revenue than its typical 45% to 50% range. Excluding the externally sourced syndication activity, our leasing segment's margin percentage was 47.2%.
And with respect to the business' response to the COVID-19 pandemic, all global operations are currently meeting or exceeding the CDC's recommendations. To protect our workforce, Greenbrier has implemented health screenings, including daily temperature readings, operating through split shifts, enhanced social distancing and expanded deep cleaning at all locations. We're operating under a dual mandate of maintaining business continuity alongside ensuring employee health and welfare.
As an essential business that supports global infrastructure, Greenbrier is dedicated to fulfilling its role to facilitate the continued stability of the transportation supply network. Greenbrier and its employees take the responsibility of helping to ensure the delivery of vital goods, including food, medical supplies and fuel to communities very seriously.
As you heard from Bill, in addition to ensuring the business continues to operate, we are focused on increasing liquidity. This will be accomplished through a variety of actions, including eliminating nonessential capital expenditures, aggressively reducing our overheads and general and administrative expenses and evaluating other strategic actions. We expect to come through the current crisis as stronger, more resilient Greenbrier.
As a management team, we remain confident in the long-term strategy developed with our Board of Directors but are focused on executing the near-term priorities that Bill described.
Now over to you, Adrian.
Thank you, Lorie, and good morning, everyone. As a reminder, quarterly financial information is available in the press release and supplemental slides on our website.
Highlights for the second quarter include revenue of $624 million and deliveries of 4,500 units, which includes 800 units in Brazil. Aggregate gross margin of 13.8%. The quarter included a contract modification payment of $9.2 million, net of tax, which strengthened our backlog and profitability. A hallmark of Greenbrier is the flexibility to find win-win solutions to our customers' needs.
Net earnings attributable to Greenbrier of $13.6 million or $0.41 per share. Excluding approximately $1.7 million net of tax or $0.05 per share of integration-related expenses, adjusted net earnings attributable to Greenbrier were $15.3 million or $0.46 per share. And adjusted EBITDA in the quarter was $71.6 million or 11.5% of revenue.
We successfully achieved $4.3 million of pretax cost synergies related to the ARI acquisition in the quarter and $7.1 million year-to-date. Because of the current uncertainties and shifting priorities, we are not reaffirming our synergy targets of $15 million in fiscal 2020 at this time, although we will continue to work towards this target.
Total liquidity at February 29 was $620 million, which includes $170 million of cash, and we have no significant debt maturities until late 2023. As you've heard on the call already, we are working to significantly expand liquidity through a variety of actions with a target of $1 billion.
We are also in the process of examining the various governmental programs available to Greenbrier and our employees, including programs like the payroll tax deferral provision and employee-friendly modifications of existing employee plans as a result of the Cares Act. We plan to utilize these to the fullest extent possible where beneficial.
Greenbrier's Board of Directors remains committed to a balanced deployment of capital that protects our business and simultaneously creates long-term shareholder value. Greenbrier declared a quarterly dividend for 24 consecutive quarters with periodic increases. Today, we're announcing a dividend of $0.27 per share, which represents a yield of 7.5% based on yesterday's closing stock price.
As announced in our earnings release, we are suspending our prior guidance for the year. Greenbrier's management team has a long history of managing through volatile times. While the COVID-19 pandemic is without precedent and has created significant uncertainty on a global basis, we remain convinced that the proactive actions we have taken so far and the planned actions we have described today will position the company for long-term strength. Now we'll open the call for questions.
[Operator Instructions] First question comes from Justin Long.
Maybe to start just bigger picture on the industry and what you're anticipating from a railcar production standpoint, FTR has recently lowered their forecast for 2020 and 2021 to that kind of low to mid-20,000 unit range. I'm curious. As you think about kind of cutting back your capacity and some of the things you discussed in the prepared remarks, is that the type of build rate from an industry perspective that you're planning on? Or do you anticipate any upside or downside to that? And then also if you could just talk about cancellation risk in the backlog or deferral risk in the backlog. Curious if you've seen any of that play out in the last month or so.
Sure. So I'll start out, and I'm sure that Bill will supplement. From an industry outlook perspective, FTR certainly has gone through several iterations of dropping expected deliveries in 2020 and 2021. Right now, with everything that's going on, I think it is really hard to say specifically what deliveries might look like the next couple of years. I think it certainly is reasonable that the numbers that they're projecting might be the numbers as you look across the years.
Absolutely, there is upside. We've seen that historically in our markets where we can be predicting that the sky is falling, and then the next thing, something wonderful happens. That's one of the things that we believe our management team and our manufacturing group, in particular, is very good at is being responsive to when opportunities present themselves.
Our commercial team is very focused on working closely with our customers and remaining flexible so that we can take advantage of those opportunities. So that's why you see us slowing production as opposed to stopping it all together. If we can continue it at a fairly slow rate, we think that gives us optionality.
And then turning to your second question about risk in the backlog, we -- as we've poured through the backlog and looking at the different car types that we're building, and it is a broad variety of car types, at this point in time, we don't have anything that we're overly concerned about. But then again, how can you work in this point in time and not be overly concerned about something.
I think we have a good history of working closely with our customers if there is an issue that they raise or a concern that we may need to modify car types or look at delivery timing. But again, at this point in time, we're feeling like our backlog is a very solid position and a good indicator of future activity.
The only thing I would add, and thank you for your question, is that, obviously, we've had a number of things occur. Lorie mentioned a few. But the oil market volatility is of concern, not only for the petrochemical and oil by rail business but -- and while Greenbrier doesn't have a strong sand concentration, many of our investors, institutional investors, only managed cars due. So we're very focused on that. But we're not seeing cancellations in the sense that you mean it. They're -- obviously, the qualitative aspects of the portfolio is another thing. But I think the kind of nimbleness our commercial team showed in this deal that was done to work with a customer to not only improve our backlog but improve our profitability and drive immediate cash flow is something that we'll try to do more of in the future. And we have great customers. We think things are going to -- on the back -- backlog is the strongest thing we've got plus the fact we can operate our factories under the essential service rules.
Okay. That's really helpful. And then second question I had was on SG&A. I get the suspension of guidance totally understandable in this type of environment. But when you look at the things you can control and you think about some of the headcount reductions that you've seen, is there any clarity you can give us on what you're expecting for SG&A this year? What's getting baked into the comment that you may build that you expect to remain profitable?
Lorie, you should address that. I think we want to be cautious about throwing numbers out there. As I said, we expect to be profitable. Manufacturing operations are particularly resilient. We do expect to have G&A instructions in all categories -- G&A reductions, I mean. It's not just going to be factory people. We already have had -- and I don't think -- I don't know what you would like to say about it, Lorie.
Thank you, Bill. That was a good lead-in. We are looking across the board. We don't take lightly the number of production workers that we've had to let go over the last 6 months. So I would say, while we're not willing to put a specific target out there since we are suspending guidance, I would say that it's going to be -- double-digit percentage reduction is going to be the goal in our SG&A, coupled with looking at overhead costs, which are some of the things that oftentimes can get overlooked. But as we're resizing our manufacturing footprint, particularly here in North America, there are overhead types of activities that can also be scaled down. So that's where we're pleased that our manufacturing margins have remained in the double digits. And we believe that's because we do know how to scale our workforce, both the line workers as well as the overhead, to adjust to reduced production rates. And you will be seeing some reductions in SG&A head count as well as some of the other things that Bill mentioned regarding his compensation, the Board's compensation. Clearly, travel restrictions, the way that they've played out, that's going to have a big impact on SG&A going forward. We have a hiring freeze, and we'll be looking at other areas where we can call back some costs.
Next question comes from Allison Poliniak.
Lorie, I just want to follow on that train of thought. Obviously, you guys were addressing operations to begin with, trying to fix and support some of them. As you step back, I know it's probably hard today because you're just dealing with the general sort of impact on a daily basis. But can you maybe comment in terms of what you think you can do structurally to support the foundation that make Greenbrier, obviously, much stronger coming out of this? I mean, are you guys even thinking of that at this point?
Absolutely. We're thinking about when we come out of this COVID-19 -- focus right now, trying to make particularly our core operations and manufacturing and our commercial group a lot stronger. I think one of the very interesting things about the pandemic is it is forcing us to rethink how we work. If you -- and I think you've been here in our offices in Lake Oswego, Allison. It's really amazing how much of our services we can continue while probably 90% of our workforce telecommute. So I think that will be a foundation for how we think about what is going to be our core to support our operations, whether it's the folks that we have down in Dallas, the folks that we have here in the Portland metropolitan area or even our workforce in St. Charles to rethink how do we use technology to build on having a solid base to support our operations and really thinking how do we make certain that we've got the best and the brightest supporting that. And maybe there are some costs that we were going to realize that we don't have to continue to incur.
Great. And then just -- I know you touched on Europe, obviously, closing for 2 weeks there. Any color on Brazil? I guess it wasn't clear to me because we've heard some industry shutting down in Brazil today. Is there sort of a slowdown or a stoppage there that you guys are preparing for near term? Or is that just business as usual in this environment, I guess?
Right. And yes, business as usual to the extent that you can today. It is one of the more interesting things because we do operate around the globe. Every country seems to have a different approach, and those approaches can change on a daily basis. As I understand it today, our operations in Brazil do continue to operate, and the government officials do encourage our employees to go to work. That would probably be one of the places that we started implementing additional health screening measures early on. Touch wood, everything has been going just fine down there, but we'll just continue to monitor that. We believe that we have good governmental support. The transportation via the rail will be an essential service, and our workers will continue to work.
As you know, we rightsized that operation last year. So they are able to operate with a fairly thin bench. And their production rates are a bit more modest than you would see here in North America. So we'll just have to watch and...
I'd just like to emphasize that the U.S. relationship with Brazil, the current administration has shown a great deal of interest in Brazil. Most of the countries in the world are following U.S. and Western -- we, on essential industries, it is an essential industry in Brazil so much of their exports and their economy relies in transportation. We're the largest builder of the equipment we build in Brazil. So I think Brazil and Europe, we expect those rules to continue in place, and we're working with -- diplomatically with our own government to encourage that to occur.
Next question comes from Bascome Majors.
Yes. I wanted to talk a little bit about the syndication channel. That's been a really important piece of your growth over the last several years, and it's pretty embedded in the model now. Can you give us an indication of how some of these financial buyer customers of yours are responding here? And any indication of how much of the backlog today was sort of slated for that channel?
Thank you, Bascome. I'll let Lorie or Adrian possibly address the last question. In general, we still see a strong distribution network there. I think it's an interesting question because the railcar leasing business is peculiar. It's a business that we have evolved to be in the leasing business. We can create portfolios at will, and we can also sell them in effect.
I don't believe personally in borrowing short and lending long on a 40-year asset. These assets, as Tiger Air learned long ago in North American Car, can come back to haunt you. And they can sink a ship. Our system is set up so that we attach leases that are quality leases. And those leases can be deployed to
Yes.
Chairman & CEO create cash flow, and as you point out, to create cash, margins, liquidity and extra value in the model we have.
As late as last week, we just closed a $48 million deal with a -- one of our existing portfolio companies, a leasing portfolio of companies that is a loyal customer. All of our customers who have multiyear agreements, including leasing companies with whom we work closely, are fulfilling their obligations. So I think that we are in good shape there.
If we were relying on the ABS market or something of that nature, and where we have partners who are in the fund business, they have firm commitments and no ability to have their funds pulled. If we were solely in that market, I think it would be much weaker position, but we have a mixed bag. We're still accepting orders. And we think we're doing well. Lorie, you want to talk a little bit more about that?
Sure. And just doing a quick scan of our backlog detail, I would say, of our Feb 29 backlog, probably less than 10% of it is going into the syndication market at this point in time.
Yes. That's great news. So it sounds like some of the build in that inventory was sold subsequent to quarter end and the $50 million deal you mentioned, Bill. Am I hearing that right?
Right. And Bascome, as you know, when you look at that line item on our balance sheet, railcars held for syndication, if you were to do some sort of a trend line over it for the last, I don't know, 8 to 12 quarters, it does go move up and down. Not necessarily an indication of anything that's going on in that particular market, but oftentimes, it's more a result of when the cars are being produced and as we're packaging a variety of different car types together to put together those syndication packages.
And again, the majority of those are attached to what in a normal market would be money good leases. We could syndicate, sell them and receive a margin just for the origination of the -- today, those are good customers. And they have good 5- to 7-year, even 10-year or 8-year cash flows attached. So we're simply in the leasing business but in a moderate way.
I'll also point out that our balance sheet, with that embedded in it, it still has a 1:1 debt equity ratio. We have $1.5 billion in net book value equity sitting beside our market cap. We also have the -- a very low amount of debt, I guess at about $1 billion or so. So I think if you look at the leasing portfolio, in the future, we're going to have more clarity for The Street and for our shareholders. We're going to still continue to try to make this more transparent and clearer. The attractiveness of our system in downturn like this is far and away above those who have these leases in returning rapid -- rapidly in rapid amounts.
Thank you for that detailed answer. If I could just tack on a related question on the funding side of that. Bill, you mentioned in short order, hoping to have access to $1 billion worth of liquidity. I think you said today, you're at about $600 million. Can you just give us maybe a sneak peek at what you think that other $400 million could look like?
Yes. I'm going to let Lorie walk through that. Unless you want me to take that, Lorie? I could generally make some comments, CapEx and...
No. I would say I'll -- thanks, Bill, and I'm sure that you'll supplement or Adrian can as well or Justin, our Treasurer. We've all been up to our eyeballs in thinking about all the various ways that we can look towards liquidity in this time of uncertainty.
So CapEx is one of the more significant items that we had already been thinking about putting on the brakes -- we're putting on the brakes a lot harder. If you look at what we were thinking we would do as we enter this fiscal year versus where we're saying we're going to be now, and even at that, I would suspect that our CapEx can come down further from what we're showing in the 10-Q when it gets filed later today or if you're looking at the supplemental slides.
And I don't expect that when we hit August 31, it's just going to -- we're going to flip a switch and go back to business as usual. I think that we're going to be focused on really making certain that we're deploying capital in the best way possible from a capital -- from a property, plant and equipment perspective for a time to come.
Additionally, like we talked about, there would be overhead and G&A reductions. I would say that could be probably nearly as much as what we're expecting in the CapEx reductions. Some of that will take a little bit of time to get momentum. We are seeing our spending levels being lower in the first half of -- actually this fiscal year isn't what we were initially anticipating. Again, a lot of that comes as we were making adjustments to reduced production rates and lower demand.
And the other things that we'll be looking at are what I consider strategic initiatives, and some of that is looking at our existing credit facilities and figuring out there are a couple of avenues where we can access additional capital under our existing credit facility. So these are not amendments. These are not going out for new debt. This is just utilizing what we currently have at our fingertips as well as evaluating our operating base.
And that particular bucket would be fairly sizable, $100 million, $150 million, for example. There's a number of these things. We don't have -- we're not talking about tapping the credit markets in any at a financing other than maybe some top-off financing if we find a good deal. So if you look at all of these things, we're -- theoretically, it should be able to go over $1 billion. But the strategic aspects of noncore businesses, cutting costs, conserving cash, it all starts mounting up pretty quickly. So we think the target is realistic and achievable in the next 5 months of this year.
Next question comes from Ken Hoexter.
Great. Just can you talk maybe, Lorie, about base levels of production given your contracts? Usually, you see a bounce in the second half. Is that production line capabilities or demand for car types that scale in the second half? I guess you got to go back to maybe 2013 before we saw real weakness in that fiscal third quarter. So I guess what I'm asking is if the backlog is so strong and ops are ongoing, what do you need to slash? Does the backlog have greater deferrals than you target? Can you cancel your own self orders? But that kind of doesn't make sense if you noted all slots were filled for production. So maybe just talk about how we should think about that railcar build going into the rest of the year.
Sure. And we have been, as we said, reducing production rates. I would say right now in North America, we're probably maybe 75% of our theoretical capacity is where we're operating. We would see that coming down maybe another 5% or 10% as we exit the fiscal year. And that's knowing what we know today.
Obviously, there's a number of things that can change. We don't believe that we've got any significant issues with any of our scheduled production or any of our customers looking to defer that further. Matter of fact, we have some customers who are pretty excited to accelerate production, but we're trying to balance that with our workforce. We don't want to let people go and then pull them back and then let them go again.
One of the ways that we're able to maintain good manufacturing margin is having setting production rates and a steady workforce. So as we look at the rest of the year, we're looking at things like reducing where we were running on 3 shifts at some of our facilities and pulling that back to running just 2 shifts, maybe working 4 days instead of 5 or 6 days a week. Those are the kinds of measures that our manufacturing team is looking at to balance our headcount with the production rates.
And again, as you think about it, we do have strong backlog, but overall demand has subsided. And we want to make certain that we are appropriately pacing our production to meet our customers' needs but also to take us through the next 1.5 years or so.
Yes. Unfortunately, if you look at that production, you've got to increase inventories. We're going to constrict inventories. We'd like to pace things, as Lorie said. If you take a step back, a couple of steps back, though, and you see the government policy as it sorts out at different levels, it's quite clear what the intent is, keep people home, break the back of the virus level of curve. We hear all those things, but I'm not so sure everybody understands why they're doing it, what the end game is. There are various scenarios, of course, as we hit the peak in this, but they're basically trying to push this down to maintain our hospital and capabilities to deal with the patients.
There will be, therefore, an effort to return to normalcy. And already you're seeing in Europe, and we have the benefit of that vision from 2 or 3 months ago, what happens if there is success. Even Italy is having some now green shoots as reported this morning. So I think that if you look at what's going on here, you can have more comfort that there might be a return to normalcy or closer -- something closer back for some of the things that we normally see at the end of -- by the last 2 quarters of our fiscal year. We're not expecting that. We're managing for cash, and our resolve is very firm. We're looking to protect the downside and hope -- very hopeful, very hopeful for the upside, and we'll be willing and capable of responding to it when it comes, and it will come.
I guess what I'm just confused by the answer, maybe just to clarify it a little bit more, is if every slot is filled and nothing has changed on that, what changes on the second half, right? Because you've said every production slot is filled. Is it that you are slowing down because customers don't want it?
Lorie said it seems -- right. Let me interrupt you just for a moment. Just say what Lorie's saying -- I think what I'm saying is every slot is filled, but we're reducing the flow-through so we can reduce our overhead and we can optimize cash. So this is something we are working with our customers to do. And I don't think the last 2 quarters of this year will be necessarily following a pattern of the last few years. At least that's a simple answer to, I think, your question.
No. That makes a lot -- that makes sense. Again, I appreciate that.
We're doing this as -- we're self-imposing a lot of this ourselves.
Yes. No, no. I get it, slowing production. And then Lorie, just to clarify on what you were talking with Bascome about the leased railcars for syndication. Does that mean you're keeping more of what you build? Or I just want to understand the temporary view of what Bill said was the $50 million sale. Is that just you had some extra at the end of the quarter and then you sold them? Or I just want to understand -- or are you building more because you said the backlog wasn't that great in terms of what you're keeping? But it looks like with those lease railcars for syndication on the balance sheet jumped up. So is that temporary keeping more of what you build?
Right. So again, what I was trying to say to Bascome, and thanks for the question, is the timing of syndication is not necessarily linear. And so as you look at the February balance sheet, it had a higher- than-normal value and number of units in railcar sales for syndication.
What Bill was referencing is something that happened in March, meaning that the syndication and our partners are still open for business. And some of that moved off of our balance sheet in the month of March. We expect that to continue.
To the question about how much is in our backlog associated with leases that we expect to syndicate, that being a fairly small number, I think what you're seeing is what has been happening over the last 6 months, where lease originations have flowed. It's not that we're expecting to keep those on our balance sheet. It's just that side of the market slowed down a little bit, consistent with the broader demand for new railcars.
In our scenarios, I anticipate that we may have to keep a large amount on our balance sheet, and that's why we think we need the extra capital.
Our downside scenarios.
Our downside scenarios. And we did, post-quarter, do a lot more in clearing syndications and assets a lot, much more than the $48 million. That was a single deal. We did...
Senior VP, CFO & Chief Accounting Officer 2 or 3.
Chairman & CEO 2 or 3 times that, I imagine. 2 or 3 other big deals. And so the market is still open to us. And I think the terms are changing. Profitability might change, but we think we've got a good handle on that. And that is, however -- that is the other big risk that we are managing besides keeping our factories running under the protection that we have and other car builders may have as essential industries.
Just to underline what Bill said earlier, again, even if these assets stay on the balance sheet, they are generating lease income.
Yes. No, I appreciate all the answers and time. If I could just get one housekeeping, Justin, what's the marine backlog for the quarter?
It was probably around, I think, $60 million to $70 million.
I think it was $59 million or $60 million.
Yes. So about $60 million.
Next question comes from Steve Barger.
Understandable why you would want to reduce capacity. But how did you decide which plants to close? And I'm specifically thinking about seeing more of the reductions coming from the lower-cost Mexican on the U.S. to avoid potential border issues?
Partly the second one. But mainly, it was the product mix. The big hit was the general-type cars hit in plant -- our Plant 2 in Sahagun in Hidalgo, the State of Hidalgo. Our joint venture plant has a very good specialization in tank cars. We produce tank cars at our Plant 3, which is Tlaxcala -- State of Tlaxcala in Tlaxcala -- the city is Tlaxcala. So I think it was more selected product mix coupled with, at the time, some concerns about moving a bit more to the U.S. footprint and testing the efficiency of the ARI facilities. And they are reasonably efficient. But it is true that the Mexican base in normal circumstances is in a very, very efficient base. And we expect when normalcy returns to go back to business as usual in all 3 factories in Mexico.
And I would say at this point, we are not having any significant supply chain issues for the North American market. We had actually planned ahead as many companies do before the Lunar New Year and had stocked up on inventory that we would have been getting elsewhere. The essential business that we're operating under actually impacts our suppliers as well, so we've been able to maintain the supply chain. The one exception is a little bit in Europe where that part of what led to a 2-week closure for the year, an extended Easter holiday, is to allow the supply chain to get caught up. They do transport more via the roads versus on the rails. And I'm sure everyone saw the pictures as borders were shut, and they -- it took a little bit of time for them to figure out how to expedite the transportation of some of those supplies across border.
It's really important to understand what happened in Europe and compare it here. You can imagine what would occur at interstate commerce if each state put up roadblocks and barriers and delayed interstate commerce from one state to another, or in the case of Europe, from one city to the other.
In Italy, for example, the individual accounts are -- have blockades. You can't go in. You can't go out. But we don't -- haven't come to that in America yet. We're prepared, if it were to come, to deal in that environment. And we've issued credentials to all of our essential employees so that they can continue business operating as an essential U.S. industry. And we believe our supply chain is through the railroad system. This is a great advantage of rail. And it's a spectacular advantage of rail because they don't have to stop at the borders, and they're protected. This is a very big thing to understand. It's going to give us a real hit in the rail sector in Europe in a sense of a heavy uplift. So I think that's kind of a silver lining in this cloud. We don't hope -- we hope that this is not going to occur in America, but it could. And if it happens, we're ready for it, and the rail is going to be the solution.
That's great color. And just to the point on the mix for the south of the border facilities, how should we think about modeling minority interest in the back half? Will you see lower production from GIMSA?
I would suspect if you wanted to model, and we're not giving guidance, but I think one of the things you might notice in our press release today is minority interest was a bit lower than normal. That is tied into the timing of railcar syndications. So less of the GIMSA joint venture, up in revenue and gross margin, therefore, less going out as our partners share. I would expect that to turn to be more normalized like in the first quarter for the next couple of quarters as the syndications work their way out.
However, can I just make one comment? We are working with our partner there given these special circumstances to correct that imbalance. And if we succeed in reaching an accord, I think we'll have an uplift to that category. So all of Lorie's comments, we may have a more favorable picture. And that's a bucket of cash that we expect we might be able to also obtain in that relationship, that we have a very supportive partner there. I'm really pleased with their cooperation. So it's a source of cash. And I think we'll see -- I'm pretty positive we'll have some good news to announce on that. We'll probably -- we'll be very transparent when we finish it, too.
And just for clarity around liquidity and cash flow. You've given a lot of detail around being able to generate cash savings from the actions you're taking. And -- but as you think about production expectations, managing working capital, timing of syndication activity, do you expect positive operating cash flow this year?
Yes.
Yes, we do.
And with lower CapEx, will you generate free cash flow this year?
I would say that we feel pretty confident that we'll be -- I think at this point, based on what we see, that is a strong possibility. Again, borrowing Bill's phrase, we don't know what we don't know at this point. And -- but from what we see as the lay of the land, currently, that's the plan that we're working towards.
The great thing, if you can operate your factories, is that this kind of business throws off cash flow as you liquidate inventories. Normally, in normal cycle, you wouldn't have this issue with cash because you throw off a lot of cash. So it should be positive. However, if you can't operate your factories, which is the situation many companies are in, then you can't run it up, and everything is on its -- turned upside down. We expect to keep our factories operating safely, and that's a core risk or threat we're managing.
Last question comes from Matt Elkott.
Once we've made it out of this pandemic and it's well in the rearview mirror, are we looking at a manufacturing footprint that is adjusted and rightsized on a permanent basis, meaning total production output less than pre-pandemic levels?
We would call it optimized. Yes. We're optimizing our total footprint for the expected market longer term. We have a great franchise. We have great markets. We simply need to prune the tree a bit. And we need to look very, very hard in the strategic bucket that Lorie is talking about, about noncore, nonessential businesses to Greenbrier, not nonessential in the nature of the business, but those businesses that aren't central to our new footprint. It's just time to prune the tree, create cash, run the company for cash, improve shareholder value over the immediate future.
I might remind you that after the Great Depression or the last pandemic of this scale after World War I, the Great War, everybody came back. They had great casualty rate from that. And then came the roaring '20s. So with people housebound and unable to buy, once they get out, they're going to be shopping, I think. At least some of them will. Many of them that I know will.
Yes. That's helpful. Thought I'd know. And also I just wanted to make sure I understood something on the cadence and deliveries. I know you guys removed for a fee some cars from -- for the backlog that was supposed to be delivered in future periods. Historically, your second half deliveries are higher than your first half deliveries at least in the last couple of fiscal years. Now given the fact that it seems like you guys are not currently engaged in any further conversations about further cancellations or deferments, will the second half deliveries be higher than the first half deliveries if no more cancellations occur?
I think that's a good estimation is that the second half would be stronger than the first half on a deliveries perspective. Some of it is just again the timing of syndications and the stuff that's on the balance sheet, which will flow through and be counted as a delivery in the second half. That will offset some of the production reductions that we're doing. But all in, I would say, at least what we know today, second half deliveries, possibly a little bit stronger than first half. Some of that being driven by international operations, not necessarily North American operations.
So -- and again, this is part of why we are suspending guidance is every day brings new activities. And by new activities, I don't mean conversations with customers about potential cancellations, but edicts by government and municipalities and that creating a stir and stress on workforce and whether or not people can go to work, et cetera, et cetera. We feel very comfortable and strongly that we are an essential business, and we will continue to operate, but that doesn't mean that we're not a little bit less efficient as you continue to deal with some of the unavoidable stress associated with this pandemic.
Got it. So you mentioned, Lorie, the international deliveries. So when all this is said and done, when you -- are we likely to look back and say that the fact that you're the only North American manufacturer with significant international operations helped you kind of soften or mitigate the blow of the apex given the rolling infection apexes around the world? So if one place is in lockdown, another place may not be. So is that going to, you think, play to your advantage when this is all said and done?
I would say that our strategy of expanding our footprint internationally absolutely is going to help us be a stronger and more resilient and more liquid entity going forward. Unfortunately, it's not like you can shift production out of, let's say, the United States down to Brazil to bring back to the United States, so -- but we do think having manufacturing and rail freight presence in some of these markets that we believe will be very strong markets for railcar production and freight loadings. So Brazil and Europe does make us a stronger company going forward.
Of course.
Can I just give an example of that, Lorie?
In Europe, the difference is post crisis that favor rail aren't going to be dramatic because of the issues with border crossings they've had, and that's quite clear. But there already is a very healthy green movement and a very large investment in rail in the billions to take traffic away from choked highway and other business. So this is going to be very positive for Europe. Brazil, similarly has those kinds of forces going on. So I think that diversification, as Europe comes out of this earlier than we do, will help Greenbrier a very great deal.
Got it. And just one final question, Bill, related to what you were just explaining. In past recessions, you guys dealt with losses in the Great Recession and I think in 2013. Can you maybe summarize for us how Greenbrier is different today than it was in 2013 and then during the Great Recession?
Sure. I'll take a shot at it, and Lorie can add. But basically, our product mix is dramatically different. Our industry leadership is different. We have a spectacularly different franchise #1 or #2 in 3 major markets, 2 internationally.
North America, we've diversified our footprint to have more optionality in the United States. We have some efficient plans for getting those knocked into shape, and they're making progress every quarter in Arkansas. So I think the company is dramatically different than it was.
Our management team is together. It's experienced. Lorie and the financial team are doing a great job, but Lorie is also getting a great deal of experience in operations, turned around a lot of -- some of the last year's issues. And I think the company is really on a very solid strategic footing at this point. We have to get through this crisis like everybody else.
Thank you very much, everyone, for your time today and your attention. If you have any other questions, you can reach out to myself, Justin, or Adrian Downes or Lorie, and we also have the Investor Relations e- mail address on our website as well. Thank you, and stay safe and healthy out there.
Wash your hands.
Thank you. That does conclude today's conference. Thank you for joining, and have a great day.
Greetings and welcome to The Simply Good Foods Company Fiscal Second Quarter 2020 Conference Call. [Operator Instructions] Please note, this conference is being recorded. I will now turn the conference over to your host today, Mark Pogharian, Vice President of Investor Relations, Treasury and Business Development. Please proceed, sir.
Thank you. Good morning. I'm pleased to welcome you to The Simply Good Foods Company earnings call for the second quarter ended February 29, 2020. Joe Scalzo, President and Chief Executive Officer; and Todd Cunfer, Chief Financial Officer, will provide you with an overview of our results, which will then be followed by a Q&A session.
The company issued its earnings release this morning at approximately 7:00 a.m. Eastern Time. A copy of the release and accompanying presentation are available under the Investors section of the company's website at www.thesimplygoodfoodscompany.com. This call is being webcast live on the website and the archive of today's remarks will also be available.
During the course of today's call, management will make forward-looking statements that are subject to various risks and uncertainties that may cause actual results to differ materially. COVID-19 has been included as a risk as it's uncertain what the potential impact could be to our business and therefore, it could cause our future results to be different than our current estimates. The company undertakes no obligation to update these statements based on subsequent events. A detailed listing of such risks and uncertainties can be found in today's press release and the company's SEC filings.
Note that on today's call, we will refer to certain non-GAAP financial measures that we believe will provide useful information for investors. The presentation of this information is not intended to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for the financial information presented in accordance with GAAP. Please refer to today's press release for a reconciliation of the non-GAAP financial measure to the most comparable measure prepared in accordance with GAAP.
With that out of the way, it's now my pleasure to turn the call over to Joe Scalzo, President and Chief Executive Officer.
Thank you, Mark. Good morning and thank you for joining us. Today, I'll recap Simply Good Foods' second quarter highlights and provide you with some details on the performance of our Atkins and Quest brands. Then Todd will discuss our second quarter financial results in a bit more detail and we'll wrap it up with a discussion of our outlook and then open the call to your questions.
Before we get into the details of our Q2 results, I'd like to discuss the impacts we're seeing with respect to COVID-19. Overall, the first half of fiscal 2020, which ended on February 29, exceeded our expectations with no material impact from COVID-19. We entered the second half of the fiscal year with positive net sales momentum, solid cost containment and confidence in our ability to execute our plans and to deliver on the outlook we provided on our earnings on January 9. Furthermore, the Quest integration is on track and our synergy plans are proceeding as expected.
In March, overall retail foot traffic was extremely volatile with the surge in the beginning of the month, followed by a significant slowdown in the second half of the month at most brick-and-mortar retailers. The retail takeaway trends of both our category and our brands followed a similar pattern.
Given the likely continuing uncertainty around consumer purchasing behavior due to COVID-19 movement restrictions, we believe it's prudent to withdraw our fiscal 2020 full year guidance at this time. Our key priorities now are to safeguard the continued health of our employees and communities, ensure the reliability of our supply chain and provide accurate and timely service to our retail customers and consumers.
We are in close communication with our key customers and suppliers. And to date, our supply chain remains robust and fully operational. Our contract manufacturers are taking extra measures to ensure that they are providing their workers with a safe environment and are committed to meet the consumer and customer requirements of our business in the coming weeks and months.
Next, we will do what's right for the long-term health of our employees, brands and business. Now let's move on to Slide 5 and discuss our fiscal second quarter results.
Second quarter results were greater than our expectations as both Atkins and Quest delivered strong sales growth as well as gross and adjusted EBITDA margin expansion. Legacy Atkins' retail takeaway in the second quarter was generally in line with our estimates. Growth was driven by bars and confections across all channels. Additionally, Atkins' e-commerce momentum continued with sales up double digits.
Quest's Q2 results were strong across all metrics and are tracking to our acquisition model. Integration work continued and is progressing on schedule. In our fiscal second quarter and for the year-to-date period, the nutritional snacking category increased mid to high single digits. The growth rate may move around a bit in the short term due to changing shopping behavior related to COVID-19 movement restrictions. But over the long term, we believe the megatrends that have fueled nutritious snacking categories such as healthy snacking, convenience, meal replacement and on-the-go consumption will continue to be tailwinds for our business and brands.
In Atkins and Quest, we have 2 trusted advantaged lifestyle brands that target different consumer groups and position us to maintain our leadership role within the category. On a run rate apples-to-apples basis, we have a scaled business with net sales in excess of $900 million, and our outsourced supply chain enables solid margins, low CapEx and results in strong cash generation.
The Atkins and Quest brands are tightly aligned around the consumer megatrends such as more frequent snacking occasions and the desire for on-the-go meal replacement. In addition, our products are uniquely positioned to benefit from growing consumer interest at high protein, low carb and minimal sugar. This profile has broad appeal to consumers interested in better-for-you as well as weight management and active nutrition shoppers looking to achieve their goal.
And while we like the diversified forms on this page, bars, chips, shake, cookies and confections, we also have a solid R&D pipeline that we'll continue to work on and refine. This is an advantaged portfolio with solid margins and financial flexibility to invest in marketing to drive growth.
Turning to the second quarter, net sales increased 83.4%. Legacy Atkins' net sales increased 12.1%, and as expected, outpaced the increase in retail takeaway due to our strong e-commerce growth as well as a slight seasonal inventory build. The contribution from Quest was a 71.3% benefit to net sales growth and grew strong double digits versus the comparable period a year ago.
The increase in adjusted EBITDA is a direct result of higher gross profit driven by higher Atkins net sales and the benefit of Quest. The increase in gross profit was partially offset by the timing of marketing we previously discussed.
Total Simply Good Foods Company's second quarter and year-to-date retail takeaway in the IRI MULO measured outlet universe increased 11.8% and 13.6%, respectively. Note that this includes the traditional food, drug and mass merchandisers as well as Walmart, BJ's, Sam's and dollar stores. Additionally, IRI MULO captures about 90% of legacy Atkins' U.S. sales. However, it only represents about 50% of Quest's sales.
Atkins' Q2 retail takeaway increased 6.1% with growth across all major channels. We are particularly pleased with our performance in the club channel, which was up strong double digits on a percentage basis versus last year. And Atkins' e-commerce business continues to do well, up about 60% in both the quarter and year-to-date periods with bars, shakes and confection all up double digits. And while early on, our momentum here has continued into Q3.
Year-to-date, e-commerce represents nearly 7% of Atkins' total gross sales. We've doubled our e- commerce business over the last 2 years and anticipate continued growth over our strategic planning cycle. Quest's second quarter nutritional snacking growth was up about 27% driven by growth in food, mass and club channels. In nonmeasured channels, the specialty class of trade has been a headwind. This is a broader multiyear category issue and not specific to Quest. And given the COVID-19 movement restrictions, the specialty channel could be a greater headwind in the balance of fiscal 2020.
The building blocks of Atkins' point-of-sale growth are similar to what we discussed over the last few years: strong base velocity growth. By form, year-to-date bars and confections retail takeaway growth remained strong, up about 8% and 31%, respectively. Shakes were off roughly 4% in the second quarter and the year-to-date period due to challenging year ago comps and other new branded product entries as well as a distribution loss of our 30-gram shake at a couple of retailers.
As expected, base velocity in bars and confections was solid and distribution was down due to shakes as well as the decision we made last year to close some underperforming bar flavors to free up supply capacity. Promotional volume returned to more normalized levels following our scale back in fiscal 2019 due to supply constraint. Although this may not be the case in the second half of the year due to changing shopping behavior related to the COVID-19 situation, retailers are reevaluating the timing of shelf resets and promotion plans that may result in a delay or cancellation of some of our previous agreed to programs.
Let me now turn to Quest. As a reminder, Quest is a uniquely positioned brand. The management team has done a great job transitioning its positioning from a high-protein bar brand to a broader healthy lifestyle snack brand focused on providing craveable food backed by metabolic science. About 2/3 of the business is the core protein snack bar with the remaining 1/3 consisting of fast-growing products such as protein chips, cookies and pizza. But no matter which product you consume, the nutritional profile is the same: high in protein, low in carb with minimal sugar.
Additionally, Quest generates about half of its U.S. sales in the IRI MULO universe in traditional food, drug, mass and club channels. The other half of Quest's U.S. sales are generated in the convenience store class of trade and the unmeasured e-commerce and specialty channels, which are not tracked by IRI or MULO.
Quest's year-to-date retail takeaway in the measured IRI MULO universe increased 27.6% with equally balanced gains from both base velocity and distribution gains. Growth across all major forms was up double digits on a percentage basis versus last year, including the important bar business, which increased 12.7% in measured channels.
The Quest team continues to do a great job of driving awareness, consideration and trial via their sophisticated digital and social marketing efforts. The unique Quest Squad influencer network is effective in attracting and retaining core consumers. The presence across various social media platforms such as Instagram, where Quest has nearly 900,000 followers, has driven solid growth.
And the Quest R&D team has recently launched some close-in flavor and line extensions as well as some new pack types such as the snack bar and 4-pack protein chips depicted on this slide. We're confident in our long-term growth plans for this business. It's a scaled lifestyle consumer brand and not just a single product. And like Atkins, it's backed by an underlying nutritional philosophy supported by science: high protein to improve strength and low carb and sugars to minimize blood sugar spike while providing a steady source of energy. Quest is in the early innings of growing brand awareness, consideration and trial, and we believe a significant runway exists for long-term growth.
In summary, The Simply Good Foods Company competes in an attractive category and is a leader in that category. The combination of Atkins and Quest provides us with 2 uniquely positioned brands and a diversified portfolio that is aligned around the consumer megatrends of wellness snacking, convenience and meal replacement. We're operating our business for the long term and committed to do the right things for our employees, customers and consumers during this challenging time.
Now I'll turn the call over to Todd, who will provide you with some greater financial details.
Thank you, Joe, and good morning, everyone. Let me start with 2 points as it relates to the numbers you see on the slides that follow. First, for comparative purposes, we will review financial statements with the 13 and 26 weeks ended February 29, 2020. Second, given our asset-light strong cash flow business model, we evaluate our performance on an adjusted basis as it relates to EBITDA and diluted earnings per share. We have included a detailed reconciliation from GAAP to adjusted historical items in today's press release. We believe these adjusted measures are a key indicator of the true underlying performance of the business.
I will begin with a review of our net sales drivers of growth. Second quarter U.S. legacy Atkins volume growth was 13%. Higher volume was partially offset by greater trade promotion resulting in total U.S. legacy Atkins net sales growth of 12%. As expected, this was greater than the retail takeaway growth of 6.1% given the continued strength of our nonmeasured e-commerce business as well as a slight seasonal inventory build. Legacy Atkins' non-U.S. net sales, including Canada and our international business, was up a healthy 13.5%. As a result, total organic net sales growth in the quarter was 12.1%. The Q2 Quest contribution was a 71.3% benefit resulting in total Q2 net sales increase of 83.4%.
Now for a review of second quarter results across other major metrics. Gross profit was $85.4 million, an increase of $35.7 million or 72% driven by legacy Atkins' sales growth and the inclusion of Quest, partially offset by a noncash $5.1 million inventory purchase accounting step-up adjustment related to the Quest acquisition, which is now complete.
As a result, gross margin was 37.6%, a 250 basis point decline versus last year. The noncash inventory step-up adversely impacted gross margin by 220 basis points. Quest's lower gross margin and the previously mentioned increase in trade promotions were a 30 basis point headwind.
Input costs were relatively benign in the quarter and we expect only modest inflation for the year. Adjusted EBITDA increased 81.7% to $41.7 million driven by the increase in gross profit partially offset by selling and marketing expenses, which increased 83.6% or $12.3 million to $27 million. The majority of the increase, about 75%, was due to the addition of Quest and the remainder driven by the timing of our higher legacy Atkins marketing expense as discussed previously. Additionally, G&A expenses increased by 82% in Q2, primarily attributable to Quest as legacy Atkins was relatively flat to the year ago period.
Moving to other items in the P&L. Interest expense increased $7.2 million to $10.6 million due to the than the year ago period of 24%. As a result, reported net income in Q2 was $10.7 million versus $12.7 million in the year ago period.
Year-to-date results are as follows. As I indicated earlier, net sales was driven primarily by volume growth and the Quest acquisition. Gross profit was $147.6 million, an increase of $46 million or 45.3% driven by legacy Atkins sales growth and Quest. This was partially offset by the noncash $7.5 million inventory purchase accounting step-up adjustment related to the Quest acquisition. As a result, gross margin was 38.9%, a 260 basis point decline versus last year. The noncash inventory step-up adversely impacted year-to-date gross margin by 200 basis points. Quest's lower gross margin and the previously mentioned increase in trade promotions were a 60 basis point headwind.
Adjusted EBITDA increased 48% to $73.5 million driven by the increase in gross profit, partially offset by selling and marketing expenses, which increased 51.3% or $15.4 million to $45.5 million. The majority of the increase, about 75%, was due to the acquisition of Quest and the timing of higher legacy Atkins marketing expenses as discussed previously. Additionally, G&A expenses increased $14.5 million to $36.6 million primarily attributable to Quest and higher legacy Atkins employee-related costs. Business transaction costs were $26.9 million and primarily associated with Quest acquisition.
Moving to the other items in the P&L. The net impact of interest income and interest expense was an increase of $9 million due to the increase in the term loan balance. Year-to-date income tax expense was $2.2 million versus $8.7 million in the prior year. In fiscal 2020, we anticipate an effective tax rate of around 26%. As a result, Q2 year-to-date reported net income was $5.9 million versus $28 million last year.
Now turning to earnings per share. In the second quarter of 2020, the company reported $0.11 per share diluted compared with $0.15 per share diluted for the comparable period of 2019. The Q2 year-over-year change was impacted by the noncash inventory step-up of $5.1 million, integration costs of $3.9 million and business combination costs of around $700,000. Adjusted diluted EPS was $0.23, an increase of $0.05 versus the year ago period. Note that we calculated adjusted diluted EPS as adjusted EBITDA less interest income, interest expense and income taxes.
Year-to-date reported EPS was $0.06 versus $0.33 per share diluted in the prior year impacted by the noncash inventory step-up of $7.5 million, integration costs of $5.3 million and business combination costs of $26.9 million. Year-to-date adjusted EPS was $0.45, an increase of $0.06 versus the year ago period. Please refer to today's press release for an explanation and reconciliation of non-GAAP financial measures.
Moving on to the balance sheet and cash flows. Year-to-date, we paid down $21 million of term loans. And at quarter end, the outstanding term loan balance was $635.5 million. Given our cash balance and our outstanding term loan balance at the end of the second quarter, we are well on track to achieving our trailing 12-month net debt to adjusted EBITDA target of less than 3.7x by fiscal year-end 2020.
Given the unpredictable nature of the COVID-19 crisis, in March, the company began to increase finished goods inventory of some of its high-velocity products. In conjunction with this as well as for other working capital and general corporate purposes, the company drew down $25 million of the $75 million available under its revolving credit facility.
The company believes it is in a strong liquidity position. And at the end of March, the company's estimated cash balance was about $80 million. We anticipate the net impact of interest income and interest expense to be in the $33 million to $35 million range, an increase of $1 million versus our previous estimate due to the drawdown of the revolver.
Year-to-date depreciation and amortization was $7.1 million and capital expenditures were about $0.5 million. CapEx for fiscal 2020 is expected to be about $5 million, driven primarily by the ERP implementation.
Let me now provide you with a brief update on the Quest integration. The identified cost synergies of $20 million are on track and will begin to materially flow through the -- in fiscal year 2021. The major parts of the integration work stream are well underway and tracking with our plan.
Specifically, the supply chain team is working on an integrated approach to procurement, distribution and warehousing. Work and discussions with vendors are proceeding as planned. Additionally, the Quest and Atkins IT teams are working collaboratively on ERP implementation onto Quest's existing platform. To date, we're on schedule and haven't encountered any major obstacles. Despite the challenges of everyone working remotely, this is one of our top priorities and the integration steering committee is in constant communication to ensure that we're progressing on our time line.
I would now like to turn the call back to Joe for closing remarks.
Thanks, Todd. As I previously stated, our first half of fiscal 2020 performance exceeded our expectations. And as we began the second half of the year, we were confident in our ability to achieve our previously communicated fiscal year 2020 outlook.
However, in March, retail foot traffic was volatile. Retail takeaway of our products was very strong in the first half of the month, followed by a notable slowdown thereafter, underscoring the unpredictable nature of the current consumer purchasing behavior due to COVID-19. The severity and duration of the current situation is uncertain and will likely continue during much of the second half of our fiscal 2020.
Therefore, given the rapidly evolving situation and the uncertainty related to the potential effects of the COVID-19 outbreak, we believe it is prudent to withdraw our previously communicated fiscal 2020 outlook. We will continue to monitor this situation, and we'll provide additional perspective on the year during our fiscal third quarter conference call in early July.
As I mentioned earlier, we're fortunate to participate in the category that has so many positive underlying growth characteristics. We believe that health and wellness will continue to be an important part of consumers' lives that the megatrends related to healthy snacking, convenience, meal replacement and on-the-go eating are long-term trends and that the low household penetration of this category will be a tailwind for our business for years to come. As such, we believe and have confidence in the long-term growth prospects of our brands and our business.
Finally, I want to extend my appreciation during these unique times. First, thank you to our employees in Denver, El Segundo and around the world. They have adjusted remarkably well to their new remote work environment. Despite juggling multiple new challenges at home, they have continued to collaborate well and execute superbly.
Second, I want to thank the leadership teams of Simply Good and Quest as well as our Board of Directors. With their continued guidance and leadership, I'm confident we will navigate the short-term challenges of this situation while positioning the business for continued long-term growth. We appreciate everyone's interest in our company and are now available to take your questions.
[Operator Instructions] Our first question comes from Chris Growe with Stifel.
Glad to hear you guys are healthy and hope it stays that way. I just thought I would ask you, first of all, as we think about this very loyal consumer base you have, just want to get a sense from you, Joe, if you can speak to it, I know it's very early, but how those kind of -- those consumers react in this environment.
And then I'm just curious how you get a sense of that. Is it through e-commerce trends? Sounds like those were strong through March. I'd say that's probably ticking up a bit. You've seen more activities through your website. Is there panel data? Just to get a sense of how these consumers are reacting now, if you have any sense of that and then how you're going to track that.
Yes, Chris, good question. Again, very early, early stages of this. And I think right now, the big driver of this has been shopping behavior influence more than it's consumption behavior influence. So we have a pretty good view of what's going on from a shopping standpoint.
And as we said in our prepared comments, that March was really volatile. Through the early portion of March up to the weekend of the 20, 21st, we saw a significant spike in foot traffic and a significant uptick in our business in both our business as well as the category. The weekend of the 20th and 21st appear to be an inflection point in people's shopping behaviors, a dramatic falloff, double-digit falloff that has remained through -- that remained through the end of the month, and people's shopping patterns and going into stores.
We saw significant channel shifting. So e-commerce, online, pickup and delivery all accelerated. And then brick-and-mortar saw a significant falloff that's kind of remained until now. So most of it right now, I'd say, Chris, is shopping behavior driven more than it's consumption driven. And right now, we don't have a really good read on how the confinement is influencing how people consume the product.
I can give you my anecdotal experience. It's your home, the pantry is pretty close and I'm snacking more frequently. So I think from a snacking behavior, our category will do well once we get over some of the shopping behavior issues. I think obviously, the on-the-go aspect of this category is going to be a negative drag for us, offset somewhat by the snacking behavior increases.
But really early innings at this point. We don't know a whole lot about consumption behavior. And our view of how we are thinking about guidance had much to do with uncertainty around shopping behavior and the decisions people are making when they go in the store.
And presumably, in any given period, there are volatile weeks and it's obviously very unique, no question. I've heard anecdotally as well, you've seen a pickup in sales in early April here, SNAP benefits. And again, there's another reload, if you will, of pantry loading. So has that picked up a bit? Have you seen that of late in most recent days and the week or any sense of that yet?
Yes. Last few days have been much better than the previous 2 weeks, yes.
Okay. That's what I assume. It's going to be jumping around, yes.
Yes. And that's -- I think that was, in part, one of the reasons that we suspended guidance. Just the sheer level of volatility of what people are doing. I'd also add, I've been into a fair number of stores just watching shopping behavior. And actually, in the stores, the behavior is really interesting. So people are moving into the stores, quickly doing their shopping and for the most part, staying in center of store.
So shopping, shelf stable, I would say, basic staples and getting out of the store pretty quickly. So one of the behaviors we noticed early in this is, even when people are shopping, they're avoiding the perimeter, not always getting into the health and beauty section where a predominant number of our products are. And that had some impact to foot traffic in the aisle and then obviously, purchase behavior impact.
Well, let's hope they go online to buy that -- the items they miss when they go through that section. So I appreciate your color there and I'll leave it on for the next question.
Our next question comes from Rob Dickerson with Jefferies.
Those were all good questions by Mr. Growe. I guess it seems like what you're implying, obviously, or what you're saying is there's a ton of volatility. We all understand that. Just -- I've had a number of people asking me this morning. If Q2 came in so well though, right, I mean you came in with above 12% organic sales growth, and that's to the end of February and you also had 12% in the first half, then the first half at 12%, the guidance was still kind of high end to 4% to 6%. Obviously, everything has changed since then.
You put in -- you said in a statement though that tracking to still hit that guidance. Even though there's volatility in the back half, we don't really know what's going to happen in the back half. But at the same time, just to try to find -- keep it positive here. In Q2, if you put up 12%, I know there was a lot of concern, probably in the shake business, coming out of the February data trends, your quarterly growth through February. So there's no COVID prebuying impact, let's say, outside of the inventory build.
Net-net, it seems like that business actually did better on the bar side than you would have thought because the narrative kind of coming into today and through February was -- would seem like they're doing worse in shake. So there's more competition in shake. So we worry about shakes, what about shake, but you actually blew away expectations in the quarter, which would make me think that you actually were way ahead of expectations on bars. So I just -- as we think about the kind of the base business, right, at COVID, ex near-term behavior shift, can you just speak to that bar business and the shake business in Q2 pre-COVID?
Yes, Rob. We felt -- as I said in the prepared comments, we felt very good about where we were through the midyear, obviously, pre COVID-19. Our -- both of our brands were at or exceeding expectations through the first half of the year. And we felt we were well positioned and very confident in our ability to deliver the year. So I think that's clear cut. So our decision going forward was much more to do about consumer shopping behavior over the month of March and the unpredictability of projecting that behavior going forward.
I would also add that the decision to suspend guidance was a more strategic decision and not just about the uncertainty and the magnitude of the duration of consumer shopping behavior, although that clearly was an important factor. It also reflected our current priorities, namely to protect our employees and our communities, ensure the robustness of our supply chain and provide service to our customers and consumers.
So for us, it was much more about doing the right thing for our business over these challenging times than it was just about the POS. But again, to reiterate, we felt really good about where we were. We felt very confident pre COVID-19 that we were going to be able to achieve our financial guidance.
And we felt good about the composition of our business. As you had mentioned, it had been driven through the first half of the year by strong bar and confection business. We had an RTD business that, for the first half of the year, was down a little bit. We felt good about the plans we had put into place in the second half of the year to get that moving into positive digits. And all in all, prior to the confinement, the consumer confinement, we're really confident that we have momentum on our side and we would close the second half of the year strongly.
Okay, great. And then just one follow-up. Obviously, given everything that's occurring within consumer behavior and what you were saying about the perimeter of the store relative to the center of the store, as that relates to the marketing plans, promotional plans, how quickly do you think those plans could actually shift, their capital allocation could shift? Like I'm asking more about positioning online, right? It seems like good protein, shelf-stable products.
If you have the right placement, let's say online like on an Amazon, you could shift that very quickly relative to be shifting your product placement within the store. Is there ability to shift promotional spend or rather marketing spend or product placement spend on the page upfront to try to actually further increase and grow that online business given the current dynamic? That's it.
So Rob, excellent question, already underway. So we've obviously seen, as I mentioned in the prepared comments, our e-commerce business, the post COVID-19 has accelerated as is other online delivery and pickup. So people are -- the best they can trying to avoid going in the stores and choosing other means of buying products. So we've seen that significant pickup in our business at other channels. That has led us to shift marketing spend already to promote our brands in those channels in order to keep some marketing pressure on the business. So good question.
Our next question comes from Alexia Howard with Bernstein.
Okay. Can I ask about the supply chain? And I noticed that you're using co-manufacturing for all of your supply. How much flexibility is there to ramp up production in those facilities? And also, how dedicated are the plants? I mean if one of them goes off-line because of COVID-19, could other plants pick up that capacity? I'm thinking about both bars and shakes. How much could you increase production on a steady state over the next few months while restaurant traffic is down?
Yes. Good question, Alexia. First, the -- we've been in constant communication not only with our contract manufacturers, but communication upstream with our ingredient suppliers. Their situation -- they are well prepared for this. We've been in communication for over 5 weeks with these suppliers to understand what their plans are coming into the situation. And we're very confident in the robustness of our co-man, our third-party logistics provider and our ingredient suppliers.
And so far, there have been no impacts in their facilities, in production and our ability to meet demand. We are in the early stages of this stepped-up inventory on key SKUs. So we typically are running about, call it, 5 to 6 weeks of inventory in our own warehouses for key SKUs, about 35 of our top SKUs.
We started moving our inventory position closer to 8 weeks, and we'll be continuing to monitor that and continue to move that up. In some instances, we'll go to 10 weeks of inventory just to give ourselves some safety stock in the event of a spike in demand from a retail standpoint. We're able to get that because we've been in communication very early on in the process. We're able to get that available capacity pretty easily.
Again, I have complete confidence in their preparedness, in the robustness of the supply chain and our ability to flow goods, ingredients to co-man, to our third-party warehouse and to customers smoothly. So it's been our top priority. We're on it very early. And so far, our supply chain has responded wonderfully to the situation.
Great. And can I follow up with a question on promotional activity? I think you alluded to the idea that you might be pulling back on that going forward. When might that kick in? And do you anticipate an increase in realized pricing as a result over the next few months?
Yes, terrific question. These are -- this is less about us pulling back. It's more about retailers changing their priorities. So as you can imagine, they're dealing with operational issues in their stores to keep the stores stocked and trying to keep social distancing, so the number of employees in the stores while consumers are shopping.
You're seeing those behaviors, a number of retailers announced the number of people that could be in the store at any one time. Some retailers are actually having traffic patterns in the store in order to minimize interaction between their employees and other shoppers.
So the retail operational impact of the situation is for some retailers to prioritize that over promotions and even shelf resets. So I would say it's too early for us to understand the impact of that. I think it's reasonable to believe some retailers will delay shelf reset, some retailers will push out promotion events to focus on in stock shelf and safety and security of shoppers.
Hard for us to know that. I do think it's reasonable to believe we are not going to be -- we probably aren't going to spend most of our trade spend that we had originally planned simply because customers will pull back events and then -- and those monies will go unused.
Our next question comes from Jason English with Goldman Sachs.
Sorry. I think in the response to last question, Joe was talking about taking inventory from $5 million to $6 million up to somewhere in the $8 million to $10 million range. It sounds like that could have a bit of an impact on cash balance just given the working capital needs. In that context, where do you think you'll land at net debt by the end of fiscal '20?
Yes. So that impact in the short term probably has about a $10 million to $15 million cash flow impact. I'd like to think by the end of the fiscal year, we can wind a good chunk of that down. But obviously, it depends on how the COVID situation plays out over the next few months. Not a big impact on our goal of 3.75 or less on the leverage. Still confident we will be below that target as of now.
We obviously have some levers to pull from a cash flow perspective on -- Joe just mentioned trade. Obviously, with no travel going on, we'll have some G&A savings here in the back half of the year. So feel much more comfortable trying to predict cash flow and to some extent, EBITDA than sales just given what's going on in the marketplace right now, but very confident on the leverage.
So -- and that's kind of what I was going to back into. I was trying to reverse engineer effectively where you're still expecting EBITDA to be. And it sounds like your EBITDA expectations aren't changing materially, it's just the sales volatility. So in that context, I imagine you've mapped out sort of bull, bear base type scenarios or worst case, best case type scenarios and the various offsets that would allow you to manage cash and EBITDA in each. Do you feel like you've adequately stress-tested on both ends of the range? And do you feel confident in the leverage ratio on either end?
We do. Obviously, whether this thing is going to last 3 months or longer, hard to tell. Hopefully, it's not -- hopefully, it will be even shorter than that. But we have -- we are in the process of doing a lot of stress tests right now. Again, we do have some levers to pull on the cost side. We'll be smart both from a short- term and a long-term perspective on those cost levers, but we should be very good on leverage.
Okay. And then the last question just on -- okay, go ahead. Sorry.
Well, Jason, one other point. As you think about consumers sheltering at home and the influence of marketing pressure, you really start challenging how much marketing dollars you should be spending and how truly effective they are. So we'll be looking at our marketing investment levels. I totally expect us to see a falloff in return on investment.
And I would expect us to pull back on marketing, actually keeping some powder dry from when people seeing we're not getting a return for that spending. We're going to pull back. We'll keep our powder dry, and that provides us even more financial flexibility going forward.
But I think you accurately reflected our sentiment. A lot of volatility on shopping, which drives some volatility on revenue, but we have a fair amount of dry powder from an EBITDA standpoint.
Yes, that makes a lot of sense. And as you mentioned, as people shelter at home, marketing may be less responsive. Behavior may also be different, too. Can you remind us what percentage of your consumption occasions you believe fall in the meal replacement versus snacks?
Yes. I don't think we accurately know that because we don't have that data. I don't completely understand how much is meal replacement versus snacking. There is a fair portion of our business that's snacking only. And so I think we're going to see, again, as I mentioned, an increase in snacking behavior and probably fewer occasions on meal replacement.
The other thing to think through, which is -- I think is really important is the consumer benefit that we offer in our brands, weight management and active nutrition, probably a little less relevant from a consumer standpoint during times of confinement. That said, I think healthy snacking will continue to be relevant to folks as they're in their homes. But I think the weight management benefit and kind of active nutrition when we just -- those are less relevant to us. That has some impact on consumption going forward.
That said, look, we're really confident in our business after we emerge out of this. We're going to make the right decisions in the short term for our business, for our employees and for our communities. And then we feel really confident in our ability once this crisis ends and our business will be right back on track.
Our next question comes from John Baumgartner with Wells Fargo.
I guess, first off, Joe, looking at the Quest business, obviously, the specialty channel has been weak already. And now with the store closures, that number falls harder as you alluded. What are you seeing in terms of the pickup in e-commerce maybe being able to offset those declines? Any data you can share thus far about any channel shift?
Yes. Just on Quest or the entire company?
Quest.
Quest. As you just step back, this has been going on for a number of years. Quest's growth in food, drug, mass and then online has more than offset the declines in the specialty channel. I think with this crisis, specialty channel will accelerate.
The good news there is, for us, is that it's, as a percent of our total business, declined pretty significantly versus the last few years. So we're reasonably comfortable that channel shifting is going to continue. This may accelerate a little bit. But we're in a good position in those other channels to pick up those fast.
Okay, great. And then to follow up, one of the pushbacks that we get on the investment case for Simple is a degree of uncertainty as to how long the Atkins brand can grow, how long the Rob Lowe messaging can work. But when you look at COVID and you hear about the more severe cases being associated with obesity, diabetes, it would seem to reinforce the low-sugar, low-carb messaging.
And as you referenced the R&D pipeline in your comments, I'm curious, as you sit back, do you think COVID opens new opportunities where you expand the low-carb portfolio into new categories? Do you have any household panel data or any anecdotes about health scares being positive for low-carb demand? Just how are you thinking about things on the other side of COVID from a demand perspective maybe?
Yes. Great question. And the one observation, the low-carb diet -- high-protein, low-carb diet is beneficial from a stress standpoint, beneficial from an immunity standpoint. So I think people that -- I think all those things that have been driving our business from a megatrend standpoint around health and wellness, obesity, diabetes will continue to be relevant and in times when people are concerned about their health will continue to be relevant. So we feel really good about how our brands are positioned from a health and wellness standpoint.
For those that kind of push back on how long can we grow this business, I'd just point out that it's been 11 years now, compound annual growth rate of 13% on Atkins. The category is still massively underpenetrated, a lot of opportunity, a lot of white space from a consumer target standpoint. So we're, again, really confident that the megatrends, once we come out of this crisis, will continue, and our ability to continue to capture those consumers open to low-carb and protein-rich will continue to be there for us.
And it's backed by science. It is a trend that's continued for a lot of years, and we're reasonably comfortable in our ability to continue to grow household penetration. And frankly, this will just teach us that health and wellness is important to us. Good immunity is important to us, so -- to people, and that's going to continue to be beneficial.
Our next question comes from Faiza Alwy with Deutsche Bank.
So I just wanted to -- you touched on this a little bit during the call, but I wanted to talk more about what you're seeing from various category point of view. We don't have full March data at this point, and we kind of saw the uptake across the board through data that we do have through March 21.
But I was wondering if you could talk a little bit more about which categories are you seeing the most volatility versus the most slowdowns. And then which categories do you think are most easily transferable to e-commerce?
So I understand, what -- when you talk about categories, what are you referring to? Are you referring to...
Yes. I just mean sort of shakes, bars.
Forms? Okay.
Yes, yes, yes.
Okay. Yes. The reason I asked that is we don't consider those categories, right? There are -- we look at the category organization around consumer need state. So broadly, we think about it as nutritious snacking, sports, active, performance and kind of weight management. Those are the 3 segments that we see. As we move -- as shopping behavior after the 20th and 21st declined kind of double digits, the category broadly moved with the foot traffic. So that's what we experienced after the 20, 21st.
Within those segments of the category, the category segments that are in the health and beauty aisle, namely sports and active and weight management, saw more falloff than nutritious snacking, which is in center of store. But we believe that -- again, that category, center of store, that's where Kind, that's where Clif is, right, they were in the center of the shopping area with shoppers coming in, getting in the center of store and getting out of the store whereas pharmacy, HABA, we saw just less foot traffic.
I think that's the phenomenon that's going on, at least was going on towards the end of March as we moved into April. Really, purchasing behaviors driven by shopping behavior. And the reason we're pretty confident that, that is the case, if you look at both of our e-commerce businesses, spiked and has stayed strong since the crisis started. So we saw a significant uptick in our Quest business.
By the way, Amazon is its largest customer, 15% of their business comes from Amazon. They saw a significant spike in the business on Amazon across all their products and it's continued to be strong. And again, on top of kind of 60% growth on our Atkins business, on online, we spiked above that after the restrictions started to take place.
So again, strong growth in the business where shopping is clearly not the issue, right? So I think right now, we're seeing purchase -- less about the form, almost less about the consumer benefit, much more about where it is in the store and how people are shopping.
And online -- yes, online, our business is strong across the board. So every form, including shake, we are seeing significant growth. So not impacted by form.
Got it. Just one quick follow-up. Just going back to the supply chain. I know historically, you've talked about how you're kind of -- as you talk to your co-packers, you're kind of putting in certain orders relative to where you expect sales will be. And to the extent that you diverge from that, there can be incremental costs associated with that. Sort of is there any framing that you can give us where, I don't know, sales are up x percent like that might have -- what the cost impact of that might be?
So far, we've not seen a cost impact. We're very early in the stages. Just to give you an example, we went few days after that. So we're early on this. We're early in communicating with our suppliers, and we were early in increasing orders on key items. So we grabbed a lot of available capacity early in the process, not with really a significant -- no significant uptick in costs.
We've seen a little bit of extra cost in our warehouse operations mainly driven by making sure that our -- the employees in those operations continue to come to work. There's a lot of pressure in the area for other distribution companies looking to try to get employees to come into their places. So we've been paying bonuses that have been helpful in us making sure that we have the employees necessary to get products out the door.
But Todd, do you have any other comments? We have not experienced any uptick at all in cost of goods.
Yes, very nominal at this point. Look, as we pointed out on the call, we are looking at this very strategically. If we have to pay a little bit more in the future to make sure we have products in our warehouse and our customer shelves, we're more than willing to do that. We have not seen that yet. So hopefully, that will not be traded over the next couple of months. But so far, very, very little.
Yes. I would remind you, too, a year ago, we saw a pretty significant uptick in bar demand. We were able to get that extra supply. We really didn't have any increase in cost in order to get that extra supply. So the good news are that we're a big manufacturer, right? We have large volume and we offer a long run when a contract manufacturer makes our product. So we're somebody that they will actually want to have more business with. So if we're getting our demands in, our requirements in pretty early, they're happy to meet those needs if they've got surplus capacity. And so far, that capacity is available.
At this time, I would like to turn the call back over to Mr. Joe Scalzo for closing comments.
Yes. Thanks again for your participation on our call today. We hope you'll continue to remain safe, and we look forward to updating you on our third quarter results in July. So I hope you all have a good day. Take care.
Thank you. This does conclude today's teleconference. You may disconnect your lines at this time, and thank you for your participation.
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for standing by. Good day, and welcome to the WD-40 Company Second Quarter Fiscal Year 2020 Earnings Conference Call. Today's call is being recorded. [Operator Instructions]
I would now like to turn the presentation over to your host for today's call, Ms. Wendy Kelley, Director, Investor Relations and Corporate Communications. Please proceed.
Thank you. Good afternoon, and thanks for everyone for joining us today. On our call today are WD-40 Company's Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Garry Ridge; Vice President and Chief Financial Officer, Jay Rembolt; and President and Chief Operating Officer, Steve Brass.
In addition to the financial information presented on today's call, we encourage investors to review our earnings presentation, earnings press release and Form 10-Q for the period ending February 29, 2020. These documents are available on our Investor Relations website at investor.wd40company.com. A replay and transcript of today's call will also be made available at that location shortly after this call.
On today's call, we will discuss certain non-GAAP measures. The descriptions and reconciliations of these non-GAAP measures are available in our SEC filings as well as our earnings presentation. As a reminder, today's call includes forward-looking statements about our expectations for the company's future performance. Of course, actual results could differ materially. The company's expectations, beliefs and projections are expressed in good faith, but there can be no assurance that they will be achieved or accomplished. Please refer to the risk factors detailed in our SEC filings for further discussion.
Finally, for anyone listening to a webcast replay or reviewing a written transcript of this call, please note that all information presented is current only as of today's date, April 9, 2020. The company disclaims any duty or obligation to update any forward-looking information, whether as a result of new information, future results or otherwise.
With that, I'd now like to turn the call over to Garry.
Thank you, Wendy. Good day, and thanks for joining us for today's conference call. Jay, Steve, Wendy and
I are dialing in from our respective homes, where I expect most of you are as well.
To begin, I'd like to thank the tribe for their hard work and dedication to the company in these volatile and uncertain times. Our #1 priority during these challenging times is the safety and well-being of our tribe. Today, we will discuss some highlights from our second quarter, but a complete discussion of our second quarter results, please refer to the press release we issued earlier today and our 10-Q for the period ended February 29, 2020, which we filed with the SEC this afternoon.
Today, we're going to talk mostly about the global health crisis caused by the COVID-19 outbreak and its impact on our business. We currently find ourselves at the peak of uncertainty as it relates to this global health crisis and its effects on both our company and the global economy. Jay and I were at the helm of WD-40 Company during the global financial crisis in 2008. Together, with our tribe, we successfully navigated those difficult times and the company emerged stronger than when we entered. We realize that the difficult times we are encountering during the 2008 fiscal crisis were very different from the ones we are facing today. We are in a health crisis, which is impacting all parts of the globe and affecting economies worldwide. As a result, the outcome is very difficult to predict. I have, again, confirmed in my mind that people are okay at dealing with risk that struggle with uncertainty. And while it is true that there's a lot we don't know today, there are some things we do know. We do know the health crisis is going to be a temporary disruptive to our business and that we will likely be some short-term negative impacts on our financial results. We know that we'll probably face some challenges in the coming weeks and months as we continue to operate a global business through these volatile and uncertain times.
However, despite all this, we also know that we're going to get through this. We have a strong tribe, who are dedicated to our brands and to our end users. We have a famous brand that people can trust and which can bring certainty to both our customers and our end users in these uncertain times. We remain committed to making our products easy to buy, which is demonstrated by their availability in over 62 unique trade channels. We have a loyal end-user base in more than 176 countries and territories around the world. We have acted to further bulletproof our balance sheet, thanks to the great work done by Jay and the finance team over the last couple of weeks.
For all these reasons, I am sure we are well positioned to navigate the storm as it unfolds from both a financial and operational perspective. This too will pass.
Now let's talk about our long-term growth aspirations. As a reminder, our long-term growth aspirations are guideposts not guidance and they are probably wrong and roughly right. Our long-term growth aspirations are to drive consolidated net sales to approximately $700 million and to do this while following our 55/30/25 business model. Our long-term targets are still very clear to us. However, with the uncertain global economy ahead, the timing of our 2025 aspirations may be delayed.
During the second quarter, except for the Asia Pacific segment, our long-term strategic drivers continue to perform mostly in line with our expectations. Let's talk about the strategic initiatives: number one is to grow the WD-40 Multi-Use Product. Our goal under this initiative is to grow WD-40 Multi-Use Product to approximately $530 million in revenue. In the second quarter, sales of WD-40 Multi-Use Product were $76 million, down 3% compared to last year. This decline was driven primarily by a 37% decline in Asia Pacific, which was partially offset by increased sales in the Americas and EMEA up 7% and 1%, respectively. The decline in WD-40 Multi-Use Product sales in Asia Pacific was driven primarily by a 74% decline in sales of WD-40 Multi-Use Product in China due to the disruptions related to the COVID-19 outbreak.
As you know, in China, many distribution channels and factories were closed and the greater population was placed in quarantine for several weeks starting in mid-January. These factors materially impacted our sales during the second quarter since we had a significant number of orders that were scheduled to ship to our customers in early February after Chinese New Year Holiday, and those shipments could not take place due to the COVID-19 outbreak in the country. However, in recent weeks, we've seen factories start to commence production and people begin going back to work. Things are slowly returning to normal for our tribe members in China. Everyone is back to work, though some tribe members are still working remotely. Schools remain closed in many areas of China. So this month, we have some little tribe members in the Shanghai office who have accompanied their parents to work. We are happy to support this temporary working arrangement. We expect we will encounter volatility and disruption in other regions, where our global business operates due to the global health crisis.
Strategic initiative number two, grow the WD-40 Specialist product line. We remain optimistic about the long-term opportunities for WD-40 Specialist and believe we can grow the product line to approximately $100 million in revenue. In the second quarter, sales of WD-40 Specialist increased 10% to $8.9 million compared to last year. We continue to move forward with our new packaging that we discussed with you last quarter, which we believe will give us a stronger brand presence for both WD-40 Multi-Use Product and WD-40 Specialist, aligning them as the blue and yellow brand with a little red top.
Strategic initiative number three, broaden product and revenue base. Strategic initiative number three includes maintenance products like 3-IN-ONE, WD-40 BIKE and GT85 but also includes home care brands such as Spot Shot and Lava in the Americas, 1001 in EMEA and no vac and Solvol in Asia Pacific. Our goal for the products under this initiative is to reach a combined revenue of approximately $70 million. Global sales of the products included under this initiative were $12.8 million in the second quarter, up 2% compared to last year.
Strategic initiative number four, attract, develop and retain outstanding tribe members. We are putting the health, safety and well-being of our tribe members and their families first during these difficult times, with shelter in place orders in effect in most of the countries where our tribe members live and work, many of them have been exclusively working from home for several weeks now. Our IT teams around the world have done an exceptional job ensuring that everyone has the technology they need to complete their jobs remotely. We call ourselves a tribe because we are a community of people with a shared purpose, that is to help feed and defend each other. During these difficult times, I think that definition is particularly fitting.
There is no better time than now to have a highly engaged workforce. During the second quarter, we took our biannual employee engagement survey, and I'm happy to report that our overall global employee engagement score remains the envy of many organizations at 93%.
Strategic initiative number five, operational excellence. The world is full of volatility, ambiguity and uncertainty, more so now than I and others have ever seen in our lifetimes. It is our commitment to maintain our operational excellence, which will help see us through the storm just as it has in other times of macroeconomic uncertainty. From a financial perspective, we are in an enviable position. We've always maintained a strong balance sheet and managed our funds wisely.
That completes the update of the strategic drivers. I'd now pass the call to Steve, who will discuss some operational highlights.
Thanks, Garry, and good afternoon. I hope that you're all well during these challenging times. The impact of the global health crisis on our operations represents an unprecedented challenge that we're evaluating and addressing daily. Therefore, today, rather than going through net sales results for the second quarter, I'd like to talk with you about what is happening right now. For details about our second quarter operational results, please refer to the press release we issued earlier today. As you know, the situation is dynamic and changes every day, so I won't be giving any numbers or any future projections, just a high-level summary of what we know today.
What I can share with you is that in March, despite the enormous disruption experienced in many countries due to COVID-19, revenue levels were in line with what we have historically seen in a typical March. While this is good news, I want to stress that the future remains uncertain. First, a bit about our supply chain. As most of you know, we outsource the manufacturing of our finished products to contract manufacturers all around the world. Many of our contract manufacturers have been trusted partners for so long, they are considered part of the tribe. Therefore, one of our top priorities is to ensure our business partners stay safe and healthy. All our partners are following the recommendations set forth by governing agencies and are taking necessary precautions to ensure the safety of their employees.
Our supply chain is structured such that WD-40 Company products are sourced, manufactured and warehoused as close to our customers and end users as possible. Because we predominantly source and manufacture our products locally, we expect we'll be able to minimize much of the supply chain risk we will encounter during the current health crisis. However, I want to emphasize that each of our regions is being impacted by their own set of local challenges and an increasingly constrained supply chain environment. In Europe, the region most negatively impacted by -- in March by the COVID-19 outbreak, our supply chain was able to produce 95% of our normal aerosol production despite severe limitations on movement. That is a wonderful testament to the resilience of our partners as well as to the hard work of our supply chain tribe. In addition, in EMEA, we had built up some buffer inventory to be used in the event of a hard Brexit. So unforeseen this extra inventory is coming in very useful to help us mitigate the supply chain disruptions we are encountering in EMEA.
The additional working capital that we invested is timely and will help mitigate some of the risks associated with the current crisis. In the Americas, our aerosol lines continue to be operational, and we are not experiencing any significant impact to our supply chain thus far. This has not been without considerable effort by tribe members who've pivoted many times to address issues as they have arisen over the past several weeks. We are closely monitoring our global supply chains, and our supply chain tribe members are working hard around the world to ensure that raw materials are obtained, production lines are functioning, orders are fulfilled and customers and end users are getting the products they need.
Now let's talk briefly about our tribe. Currently tribe members in 11 locations around the world are under mandatory work-from-home orders. We have 3 locations where tribe members have the option to work from home but are not mandated. Only one WD-40 Company office in the world is open and that is in Shanghai today.
As Garry mentioned earlier, things are starting to return to normal in China. We expect the next several weeks will be challenging for our tribe members all around the world, but the tribe's experience in China gives us some hope that we will see the other side of this health crisis soon. Our tribe members in China have been a wonderful resource as they've been able to share their health crisis learning moments with the rest of us.
Finally, some good news. As you know, at WD-40 Company, we play the infinite game. We are a financially strong company, and we take a long-term view. I'm happy to be able to share some good news with you today. First, we are transitioning from a marketing distributor arrangement to a direct model in Mexico. We have recently hired 8 new tribe members and have opened a new office in the city of Monterrey. Putting the foundation of our new direct market in place has been underway for a very long time. I want to thank the tribe members who have worked tirelessly to make this happen. We're thrilled to share that in May, we will begin to service our Mexican customers on a direct basis, WD-40 Multi-Use Product and 3-IN-ONE are #1 and #2 brands in their category in Mexico. We believe by transitioning to the direct model, we'll be able to generate both faster top line growth as well as stronger gross margins over time.
Second, e-commerce is the fastest-growing retail channel in the world today, and it is our fastest-growing channel as well. 2 years ago, we committed to our global vision of becoming the category leader in digital and e-commerce, and we continue to make outstanding progress in this area. Year-to-date, e-commerce sales globally grew by 44% compared to last year. We have also recently appointed a Chief Digital Adviser from a leading consultancy who will work with our global tribe to continue our journey towards becoming global leaders in the digital space in our category. With 1/3 of the world's population observing stay-at- home orders, we're seeing what we believe is a seismic shift in online behavior and one that we believe may lead to a permanent behavioral shift in buying patterns. WD-40 Company is well positioned to benefit from the significant change in the landscape. In addition, we're learning from the recent experience we had in China. While year-to-date sales in China declined by 52% due to the health crisis, e-commerce sales increased 39% over the same period.
Now I will turn the call over to Jay for an update on the financials.
Thank you, Steve. Today, we reported net sales of $100 million for the second quarter of fiscal year 2020, down 1% compared to the second quarter of last year. Translation of our foreign subsidiaries results from their functional currencies to the U.S. dollar, a slight favorable impact on sales in the second quarter. On a constant currency basis, sales would have been $99.7 million, down 2% compared to last year.
Net income for the second quarter was $14.3 million, a decrease of 10% compared to last year. And diluted earnings per share for the second quarter was $1.04 compared to $1.14 for the same period last year. And from a financial perspective, we're in an enviable position with a very strong balance sheet and a newly amended $150 million credit facility from which we recently elected to draw down $80 million to further strengthen our liquidity position. We're focused on managing through this crisis to come out the other side as a much stronger business.
Let's start with a quick discussion about our 55/30/25 business model, the long-term targets that we use to guide our business. On today's call, I'm going to focus primarily on the drivers for gross margin. In the second quarter, our gross margin was 53.6% compared to 55.4% last year. This represents a decline of 180 basis points. The major drivers of this decline were sales mix changes, higher warehousing and freight and other miscellaneous costs. Impacts from sales mix changes and other miscellaneous costs in all 3 trading blocs negatively impacted our gross margin by 120 basis points compared to the prior year period. The unfavorable impacts in the Americas and EMEA were primarily due to unfavorable shifts in product and customer mix as well as higher miscellaneous costs. In Asia Pacific, shortfalls in sales in China, a direct market where we typically have higher gross margins, negatively impacted the overall margin for Asia Pacific.
In addition, higher warehousing and inbound freight, primarily in EMEA, negatively impacted our gross margin by 110 basis points. Changes in major input costs negatively impacted our margin by 10 basis points. Petroleum-based specialty chemicals positively impacted our margin by 20 basis points period- over-period. However, increased cost of aerosol cans negatively impacted our margin by 30 basis points and more than offset the gains we realized due to lower specialty chemical costs. Finally, changes in foreign currency exchange rates negatively impacted our gross margin by 40 basis points. These negative impacts to gross margin were offset by the favorable effects of price increases and lower discounts to our customers, which when combined, positively impacted gross margin by 100 basis points in the second quarter.
Now let's talk a little bit more about oil. Recently, crude oil has plunged to multiyear lows. Falling crude oil prices will most likely be a net positive to our gross margin. However, it is extremely difficult to know the long-term impact of these changes until we see it in our cost of goods sold, which will take some time. This is because we don't buy crude oil, we instead buy custom-formulated petroleum-based specialty chemicals, which have complex cost drivers, including the manufacturing region, fixed production costs and distinctive supply and demand characteristics. In addition, since the global petroleum market is based on the U.S. dollar, when the price of oil falls, the dollar often strengthens. And for products manufactured in countries outside the U.S., this can leave costs in other currencies much higher. Overall, we estimate only a small amount of the total cost to produce a can of the WD-40 Multi-Use Product directly correlates to the price of a barrel of crude oil. If oil stays here at current levels for a considerable amount of time, we will likely begin to see a benefit in our cost of goods in about 90 to 120 days.
Now a word about our balance sheet and our capital allocation strategy. The company's financial condition and liquidity remains strong. We believe our efficient business model and the recent steps we've taken to strengthen our balance sheet gives us position to manage our business through this crisis as it continues to unfold. In March, we amended our line of credit with the Bank of America to extend the maturity date to 2025 and to increase the revolving commitment to $150 million.
At the end of March, we had borrowed an additional $80 million on the revolving line of credit, bringing the balance to approximately $149 million. Though we are already fairly well capitalized, we decided to exercise an abundance of caution and draw on the remaining balance of our line of credit to ensure liquidity and manage potential risk during this time of unprecedented macroeconomic uncertainty. If no need arises for these additional funds, as we weather this storm, we will simply repay the debt and restore our available credit.
In addition to these steps, we have elected to suspend the stock purchases we have been making under our current share buyback plan. We are doing this in order to preserve cash until we have a better idea of the long-term financial impacts of this crisis. We continue to return capital to our shareholders through regular dividends. On March 17, our Board of Directors approved a quarterly cash dividend of $0.67 per share payable to shareholders of record on the close of business April 17.
In fiscal year 2020, we expect to complete our investment of approximately $30 million in capital projects, primarily to procure the proprietary machinery and equipment we need to manufacture our next- generation Smart Straw delivery system. With everything thing going on in the world, we believe investing in our future is more important now than ever before.
So with that, let's turn to fiscal year 2020 guidance. The COVID-19 pandemic has injected a measure of uncertainty into our business, which makes it very difficult for us to accurately forecast short-term financial results for the company. Therefore, today, we are withdrawing the fiscal year 2020 guidance, which we last reiterated on January 9. We are continuing to monitor the situation closely and we will update you when we can.
And that completes the financial overview. Now I'll turn it back to Garry.
Thanks, Jay. In summary, what did you hear from us on this call? You heard that our China subsidiary was materially impacted by the COVID-19 outbreak during the second quarter. More importantly, you heard that things are slowly returning to normal for our tribe members in China. You heard that we expect we will continue to encounter volatility and disruption in the regions where our global business operates due to the global health crisis. You heard that our employee engagement score remains the envy of many organizations at 93%. You heard that we are transitioning from a marketing distributor arrangement to a direct business model in Mexico. You heard that we continue to make outstanding progress in the area of digital and e-commerce, and that e-commerce sales have grown 44% year-to-date compared to last year. You heard that we elected to make changes to our line of credit agreement and recently drew down a significant rainy day fund from this line to bulletproof our balance sheet. You heard that we are suspending purchases under our current share buyback plan in order to preserve cash that we continue to return capital to our investors through dividends. You heard that we withdrew our previously issued fiscal year 2020 earnings guidance due to the rapidly evolving impact of the global health crisis. You heard that we are confident our long-term growth aspirations remain a realistic opportunity.
In closing, I'd like to share with you a quote from my friend, Simon Sinek, " Remaining calm in times of desperation makes way for opportunity." Thank you for joining us today. Please stay safe. We would be pleased now to open the conference call to your questions.
[Operator Instructions] Your first question comes from Linda Bolton-Weiser with D.A. Davidson.
So I guess I was most struck by Steve's comment that March was similar to previous March results. So I guess you're kind of saying that sales were flattish, not significantly down. I find that hard to believe, given that we've had a suspension of almost all nonessential manufacturing in the United States, in other countries. So can you just kind of give us a little more color? And also, we've had a lot of investors ask us about a breakdown of your demand by end market. So like how much is automotive, how much would be high tech, manufacturing, different end-market demand. Do you think you could give a little color on all of that?
Thanks, Linda. We were pleased with being able to hold up in March. And I guess it does really reflect on our multiple trade channel, multiple country business strategy. As far as trade channels are concerned, I'll ask Steve just to give a high-level view of the key channels that we operate in.
Sure. Thanks, Garry. So as Garry said, I mean, one of the big advantages of WD-40 Company is that we are diversified both by trade channel and by geographies. So no one trade channel, customer or geography is -- we're not overly reliant. The biggest markets we operate in, our automotive, DIY hardware, e-commerce, as we mentioned on the call, is a fast-growing channel, both in terms of percentage growth and also dollar volume, so -- and an industry as well being the -- one of the big 4. And -- but the beauty is the diversification. And so no one of those trade channels has an overbearing weight on the overall revenues.
So do you expect -- I mean are you seeing anything in your end markets that indicate that because the decline in China was quite significant. So is it just the rest of the world is slower in seeing the impact in regarding COVID-19 in China?
I can give you some color on that, Linda. The down -- what happened in China was due to a planned shipments that we had that were to go out to our customers straight after Chinese New Year. We had a substantial order book in place. And as is customary, China kind of waits till after Chinese New Year to renew themselves and to take on that inventory. And so if the COVID hadn't happened, we would have shipped those orders. So it wasn't an end user a demand issue, it was our inability to ship that caused the sudden downturn in China.
China started the shutdown around January 17 and was outright through till well into February, and we didn't -- we weren't able to ship what we had. We are starting to ship those orders now. So that's why there's a difference between China. If you think about in the world right now, most of the dominant trade channels that we operate in are functioning, hardware, home improvement, grocery, club, mass merchant, those trade channels are operating, albeit at a different level. So people are buying. I drove past my local home improvement store this morning and the parking lot was 75% full. People are going there to buy a product, probably WD-40 as well. So there were 2 different things that went on between China and what's happening in the U.S.
Okay. That's a good explanation. So can you talk about just your innovation that you were planning to launch? I think it was you were talking about June or July? Are you going to delay that or are you still going to launch your major innovation?
We are still going ahead. You're referring to Smart Straw 2 or Smart Straw next generation. The first market to launch that will be Canada in June. And we're also moving ahead with the continued conversion of our Specialist product range into the new blue and yellow, red top trade dress from our brand architecture. And we will continue to work on the rollout of Smart Straw next generation around the world. It will probably take us 18 months in total to get it out there as it was in the past, but no, we're full steam ahead.
Okay. And then just finally, in terms of the gross margin, I guess relative to at least my estimate, it was kind of disappointing in the quarter. And you mentioned, I think mix issue was quite a big issue. It seems like in many quarters, mix seems to be an issue. And I'm just wondering, is the idea that you're continuing to shift people toward the Smart Straw and Specialist, which is a higher-margin product. Is that still occurring? And then if so, what are these -- I don't know, it seems like almost like a recurring issue with mix that impacts your gross margin?
Okay. I'll touch some of it -- and I'll give it to Jay, if I can. The mix issue in this quarter was the shortfall of sales in China. We have a higher gross margin in China. And because our sales fell into the gutter there completely, that was the issue. Jay, I'll pass on to you for the rest.
Yes. Thanks, Garry. Yes, Linda, that was -- a lot of what happens is in our direct -- the other is -- the depending on the volumes in any given period that go through those 2 distribution channels. So our MD markets, our marketing distributor markets, have a quite a bit lower margin as a whole, our direct markets have a much higher margin. And then when we see mixes between -- there's also even mixes between markets. So for example, there's much higher-margin in Europe than there is in the U.S. based on just the sophistication of the distribution channel and the size of the market.
Okay. And can I just sneak in one last one. Going back to look at your financial results back in the last recession in the '08, '09 period, I think it was an 8% sales decline, if I'm not mistaken. So you did have a sales decline. I know you don't want to give guidance, you're withdrawing your guidance. But would it be a bad idea for conservative analysts to put something like an 8% decline or something like that, assuming we go into a recession?
I'll let Jay answer that.
Linda, the decline that was -- you mentioned for 2008 was primarily because of the strengthening of the U.S. dollar against the pound. It devalued some 25%, I think, in 2008. And I think right now, it would be irresponsible for us to try and predict the future until we get through what we have to get through now. I think we'll have a better idea once the world starts to ramp up again. So -- but in the U.S., in 2008, our sales went sideways. Our consolidated revenue went down, but that was because of the change in the exchange rate from the British pound. Right, Jay?
Yes. Actually, we had a shortfall in the U.S. We actually, in local currency or in-source currency, we were -- we had growth in EMEA, but it was wiped out because of the headwind from foreign currency exchange.
[Operator Instructions] Our next question comes from the line of Daniel Rizzo with Jefferies.
I got cut off at the end of the prepared remarks. So forgive me if this has already said but did you indicate that the dividend is largely intact that you're not considering cutting that at this point?
No. Yes, we did issue a dividend. The Board declared a dividend, and we -- excuse me, we will issue a dividend at the end of the month.
Right. But I'm saying going forward in the second half of the year, given the uncertain outlook.
That -- we make those dividend decisions on a quarterly basis. I mean our policy hasn't really changed, and that is -- we look first to pay a dividend out at 50% of our earnings, and that strategy continues.
Okay. And then, Garry, you mentioned seeing in your local distribution channel that things were still going -- your channels are still relatively intact there, and I assume that's with the home improvement market. But I was wondering if you're seeing similar things with both the construction, commercial and then just industrial activity, given the lack of commercial and industrial activity and auto activity, I was wondering, I would assume that you're seeing significant declines in those distribution channels or the channels through those end markets.
Daniel, we're not seeing it yet. It's probably too early, but let me say this, construction is -- at least in California, has been designated as an essential service. As I drive around, I see trucks out, builders out, auto repair stores are still open. The auto industry in itself, in the manufacturing side, I don't think that's huge consumption, but people are fixing cars, the auto zones, O'Reillys, the brake part areas, the oil change people, they're all operating. So stuff is getting done at this time.
Okay. That's actually very helpful. And then final question. You indicated that the CapEx, I think, is going to be at $30 million this year. We assume -- am I right to model that starting next year, it goes back more towards a traditional level? Or is it going to stay at this kind of elevated level as you guys continue to roll things out?
Jay?
We would expect it to go back to very close to historical levels. Once we complete the project with the innovation around our next-generation Smart Straw, we don't have any other significant investments that are begging for a lot of capital.
Is that project expected to be completed this year?
It will be -- there will be some carryover into '21, FY '21.
Ladies and gentlemen, that does conclude our allotted time for questions. We thank you for your participation on today's conference call and ask that you please disconnect your lines.
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for standing by, and welcome to the Workiva Inc. First Quarter 2020 Earnings Conference Call. [Operator Instructions]
I would now like to hand the conference over to your speaker today, Adam Terese.
Good afternoon and thank you for joining us for Workiva's First Quarter 2020 Earnings Conference Call. Today's conference call is prerecorded. This afternoon, we'll begin with comments from our Chief Executive Officer, Marty Vanderploeg, followed by our Chief Financier, Stuart Miller. A replay of this call will be available until May 7. Information to access the replay is listed in today's press release, which is available on our website under the Investor Relations section.
Before we begin, I would like to remind everyone that during today's call, we'll be making forward-looking statements regarding future events and financial performance, including guidance for our second quarter and commentary on our full year 2020. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks and uncertainties. Workiva cautions that these statements are not guarantees of future performance.
All forward-looking statements made today reflect our current expectations only, and we undertake no obligation to update any statement to reflect the events that occur after this call. Please refer to the company's annual report on Form 10-K and subsequent filings for factors that could cause our actual results to differ materially from any forward-looking statements.
Also, during the course of today's call, we will refer to certain non-GAAP financial measures. Reconciliations of non-GAAP to GAAP measures and certain additional information are also included in today's earnings press release.
With that, we'll begin by turning the call over to our CEO, Marty Vanderploeg.
Thank you, Adam, and thanks to everyone for joining the Workiva first quarter 2020 conference call. Our hearts go out to the people directly affected by COVID-19, and we are grateful for the essential workers we can to protect our employees and their families during this difficult time. We are grateful that all of our employees are able to work from home and that we are able to fully compensate the small number of employees who do not have roles outside of our physical offices.
To keep our team connected and focused, I host a weekly live stream Q&A to offer updates, insights, advice and support to all employees.
As a cloud-based technology company with a highly distributed workforce, the shift to work from home has been smooth for us. With cloud platforms and digital channels, it's been mostly business as usual. We continue to deliver the highest levels of performance, availability and security. Our technology, global infrastructure and operating model, along with our 24/7 customer support, enable our customers to work from home in a controlled, secure environment with their most sensitive data.
This ability to work from anywhere is becoming the new baseline. We believe that Workiva will be a key player in this broad-based shift to remote work, which will drive increased demand for our reporting and compliance platform for years to come.
Workiva entered this global crisis from a position of financial strength. We believe we are in a stronger, more flexible financial position now than ever before, including nearly $500 million in unrestricted cash and short-term investments.
We are pleased with our first quarter 2020 financial results, which exceeded guidance for revenue and operating results. However, like many other companies, the month of March delivered some unprecedented challenges as we saw a number of customers and prospects delay software purchases.
In March, we restricted nonessential business travel and we transitioned to all virtual sales meetings, even though our traditional sales process has been disrupted. In many cases, we are finding it easier to access people, and we are having engaging conversations with customers and prospects. In fact, most of the companies that delayed first quarter purchases are back in our pipeline. Stuart Miller, our CFO, will provide more details about our financial results later in the call.
In times of rapid change, our commitment to each other and our customers remains the same. Workiva is driven by our values, which sustain us in these uncertain times. We are a strong, resourceful company, and we are moving forward, staying focused on our goals and objectives.
We continue to execute on our growth vectors, which include EMEA, Wdata and our platform solutions for integrated risk, global statutory reporting and the U.S. government. And we are continuing to hire people in the areas where we see the most potential for growth.
Despite COVID-19, we remain confident that Europe will comprise 25% to 30% of our total revenue over time. We recently launched a new solution to help mid-sized companies comply with the European Single Electronic Format, commonly known as ESEF. Our new solution offers limited functionality, specifically for this market. Because this solution resides on the Workiva platform, customers are able to upgrade to our more comprehensive ESEF solution and leverage additional platform capabilities at any time.
We also plan to continue extending the capabilities of our platform into additional industry verticals. Earlier this week, we announced that we will be working with utility, pipeline and other energy companies, many of which are existing customers, automate data integration and streamline reporting to the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, known as FERC. Last June, FERC adopted XBRL as its reporting standard. With our connected reporting platform and our leadership in XBRL, Workiva is ideally positioned to capture this market.
In response to COVID-19, we shifted all marketing activities to virtual channels. As a result, our annual Amplify User Conference will be hosted virtually later this year. In March, our 2-day virtual event, Amplify GO, was attended by nearly 2,400 customers, prospects and partners and was our largest event to date.
I want to thank our amazing employees for their ongoing dedication and commitment to delivering our platform and supporting our customers and partners around the world.
With that, let me turn it over to Stuart Miller, our CFO.
Thank you, Marty. I'll comment on our financial position, review our business model and then explain at a high level why we beat our Q1 guidance. Next, I'll discuss Q1 2020 results versus Q1 last year and finish with forward guidance.
We believe Workiva is well positioned financially to weather the storm from COVID-19. Indeed, we believe Workiva has never had a stronger or more flexible financial position than we do now. At March 31, Workiva had $496 million of unrestricted cash and short-term investments. The first maturity on our funded debt occurs in more than 6 years. Our debt obligations have no restrictive financial covenants.
We believe our business model mitigates many of the challenges posed by COVID-19 for 6 reasons: first, demand for our solutions is relatively insulated from the business cycle. Software to assist larger enterprises with regulatory compliance and performance management is needed in both good times and bad.
Second, our cloud-based platform is designed for team members to collaborate remotely, including those who work from home. On-premise systems cannot compete as well in this environment.
Third, we enjoy high revenue retention rates because our customers love the design and functionality of our software and the high-quality of our customer service. Our platform saves time, reduces risk and eliminates many of the tedious aspects of financial and managerial reporting. We think our value proposition is compelling relative to alternatives and the markets we serve.
Fourth, most of our customers pay us annually in advance for a subscription to our software platform. These contracts renew fairly evenly among the 4 quarters of the year. As a result, around 90% of the subscription revenue we recognize every quarter comes from deferred revenue.
Fifth, no customer accounts for more than 1% of our revenue. Our 10 largest customers account for less than 5% of our revenue in the aggregate.
Sixth, the sources of our revenue are diverse. But Note 8 to the financials in our 10-Q breaks out revenue contribution by industry of our customers.
Shifting now to our financials. As always, I will talk about our results and guidance on a non-GAAP basis. Refer to our press release for a reconciliation of our non-GAAP and GAAP results and guidance.
I'll talk about how well we did against guidance first. We beat Q1 2020 revenue guidance at the midpoint by $2.75 million. Higher subscription revenue accounted for about 1/3 of the beat, while higher services revenue contributed the balance.
We beat guidance on Q1 operating income by a relatively wide margin. I'd like to explain the $8 million positive operating income swing at a high level. The revenue beat I just mentioned accounted for 1/3 of the swing. Expenses accounted for the remaining 2/3 of the beat, as follows: travel and entertainment expenses were just over $1 million better than forecast due to COVID-19 travel restrictions; medical care expenses were almost $1 million better than forecast due to postponement of discretionary medical visits from COVID-19 restrictions and a higher percentage of our employees electing the high deductible medical insurance plan; sales commission expense was about $0.5 million better than forecast due primarily to a change in our sales commission structure; fees paid to recruiters, consultants and legal advisers were $0.5 million better than forecast. The remainder of the beat on Q1 operating income, just above $2 million, came from a hiring at a slower pace than forecast, some of which was related to COVID-19.
Now turning to a comparison of Q1 2020 to Q1 last year. We generated total revenue in the first quarter of $85.8 million, an increase of 22.6% from Q1 2019. Breaking out revenue by reporting line item, subscription and support revenue was $68.4 million, up 21.8% from Q1 2019. New solutions, new logos and conversions to solution-based licensing helps drive strong revenue growth in Q1 2020. 56% of the increase in S&S revenue in Q1 came from existing customers. The balance of the increase came from new customers added in the last 12 months.
Professional services revenue was $17.4 million in Q1 2020, an increase of 26% from the same quarter last year. Growth was driven by helping customers migrate to inline XBRL, additional revenue and setup in consulting and organic XBRL growth.
As a reminder, the first quarter is seasonally the high point for our revenue from XBRL tagging since most of our publicly traded customers prepare their 10-Ks in the first quarter.
Turning to our supplemental metrics. We finished Q1 with 3,507 customers, a net increase of 141 customers from Q1 2019 and a net decrease of 3 customers from Q4 2019. On a gross basis, 73 customers churned in Q1, which is a normal level of churn for us, and we added 70 new logos in Q1, which is below normal for us and was due to the impact of COVID-19.
In early March, 50 new deals in our pipeline carried our highest rating for a probability to close by month end. Of the 50 deals, 10 did close in March and 32 returned to the pipeline, of which 30 would have been new logos. Normally, a very high percentage of these types of deals would have closed by month end.
Our revenue retention rates remained strong. Our subscription and support revenue retention rate was 94.5% for the first quarter of 2020 compared to 95.7% for the same period last year. Almost half of the attrition in the quarter came from M&A, delistings and bankruptcies. Looking ahead, we expect a higher incidence of bankruptcies and delistings.
On the positive side, we expect less pressure from M&A in the near term. With add-ons, our subscription and support revenue retention rate improved to 110.9% for the first quarter of 2020 compared to 110.7% in Q1 2019.
Our progress with larger subscription contracts continues to be promising. The number of contracts valued at over $100,000 per year totaled 670 in the first quarter of 2020, up 36% from Q1 of the prior year. The number of contracts valued at over $150,000 totaled 308 customers in the first quarter, up 49% from Q1 2019 results.
Moving down to P&L. Gross profit totaled $64.3 million in Q1, up 25.5% from the same quarter a year ago. Consolidated gross margin was 74.9% in the latest quarter versus 73.2% in Q1 2019, a net expansion of 170 basis points.
Breaking out gross profit. Subscription and support gross profit totaled $56.6 million, equating to a gross margin of 82.9% on S&S revenue, a contraction of 30 basis points compared to Q1 2019. Additional headcount to help upgrade customers to our next-generation platform was the primary driver of the contraction.
Professional services gross profit in the first quarter was $7.6 million, equating to a 43.7% gross margin compared to 32.7% in Q1 2019 due to improved utilization.
Research and development expense in Q1 totaled $21.4 million, up 6.5% from Q1 2019, primarily due to higher compensation costs. R&D expense as a percentage of revenue improved to 25% in Q1 2020 from 28.7% in Q1 2019.
Sales and marketing expense for the quarter increased 42.6% from Q1 2019 to $33.4 million, reflecting our investment in sales talent primarily to drive bookings in EMEA, integrated risk, global statutory reporting and U.S. government.
General and administrative expenses totaled $8.7 million in Q1, up $1.9 million compared to Q1 2019. G&A expenses as a percentage of revenue increased 40 basis points to 10.1% due to additional headcount, higher software expenses and increased rent expense.
We posted an operating profit of $800,000 in Q1 2020 compared to an operating profit of $900,000 in Q1 last year. Workiva's operating margin in Q1 was substantially better than our guidance, as I discussed earlier.
Turning to our balance sheet and cash flow statement. At March 31, 2020, cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities totaled $496 million, an increase of $8.1 million compared to the balance at December 31, 2019. In Q1 2020, net cash provided from operating activities totaled $4.7 million compared with cash provided of $5.1 million in the same quarter a year ago.
At the end of each quarter, we review outstanding invoices to determine which ones present a collection risk due to a variety of factors, including credit risk, consistent with ASC 606. We remove the invoices at risk, taking the amounts out of both accounts receivable and deferred revenue until payment is collected, which is when we begin to recognize revenue.
At March 31, 2020, we classified $6 million of receivables to this reserve account, up $1.7 million from the reserve at year-end in anticipation of the impact of COVID-19. The increase in this reserve account reduced deferred revenue by an equal amount, and therefore, it reduced billings at the end of the quarter. Remaining performance obligations on subscription contracts continue to vary from deferred revenue as we implement multiyear contracts with annual billing terms for some customers.
Turning to our guidance. For the second quarter of 2020, we expect total revenue to range from $80.3 million to $80.8 million. We expect subscription revenue to grow at a rate in the low teens compared to
Q2 last year. We expect services revenue to show the normal seasonal decline from Q1. And in addition, we expect to post Q2 services revenue below last year's Q2 results. You may recall, we had a onetime contribution to services revenue from a regulatory change in Q2 last year. We expect non-GAAP operating loss to range from $6.8 million to $7.3 million in Q2 2020.
The depth and duration of the economic disruption from COVID-19 is unknown. While we have a large pipeline of new deals, we have limited visibility on when the deals will close. So we are suspending specific guidance for full year 2020. However, we are providing some directional guidance for the rest of the year. Relative to the guidance that we gave in February, we now expect full year 2020 revenue to grow at a slower pace and operating margin to improve. We will now take your questions. Operator, we're ready to begin the Q&A session.
[Operator Instructions] And your first question will come from the line of Brian Peterson with Raymond James.
This is Alex Sklar on for Brian. Marty, first one for you. This is in your prepared remarks, but can you just talk more about the resiliency of Workiva's platform and a work-from-anywhere environment? And with that, I think you talked about demand potentially picking up. Are you already seeing that in the current environment, catalyzing greater number of conversations or leads? And then I had a follow-up for Stuart.
Yes.
Your phone is muted, Marty.
Maybe I'll pass one for Stuart here while...
Yes, sorry, Marty's phone was muted.
Yes, okay.
Go ahead.
All right. Well, I guess, just talk about the visibility on the backlog. The RPO growth this quarter, especially in light of the commentary you gave on the March late stage pipeline. Is there any reason from a Workiva standpoint that you wouldn't be able to implement or go live on any portion of that next 12-month balance? Understanding customers may ultimately push timing, but just curious on your own ability to meet all that backlog.
No, I don't think there's any restriction from our perspective on that. Most of the onboarding we do or virtually all the onboarding we do is remote anyway. Did you hear me, sorry?
Yes, yes. And then did we lose Marty on the first question?
Yes. I think he's trying to dial back in.
I'm sorry. Say that again?
Okay. Well, maybe another one for you then, Stuart. On the backlog growth, it accelerated some even with the...
Even with the commentary -- yes, the backlog growth accelerated on the full RPO, not just the next 12 months one, which is impressive, I think, given you're comping SBL last year. I just was curious if you'd call out any of your kind of 4 to 5 growth opportunities as having an outsized contribution?
Yes. I would say -- just to remind you on the RPO side, some of the growth there is due to our signing 3- year deals with 1 year to pay, and so that's picking up the -- that's accelerating on the RPO side. But we did show good deal size growth in Q1.
Next question is from the line of Rob Oliver with Baird.
It's Matt Lemenager on for Rob. So the question was in the 30 -- I guess it would be the 32 deals that got pushed or, I guess, returned to the pipeline, was there any recurring message or theme there? I realize it was COVID-driven, but it wasn't people -- the discretionary spend for maybe around CFO suite or accounting suite being kind of pushed to the back burner as kind of near-term, other IT trends took priority. Or just kind of looking -- is there any theme or message that happened in those 32 deals that got pushed?
Let me see if Marty is not -- still on, so I guess I'll place...
Can you guys -- can anyone hear me now?
Yes, we can now, Marty. You want to take that one?
Yes. It was on the right line. They didn't have me connected, I'm sorry, because I could hear everything, and same number. Anyway, I apologize everybody.
Back to the resiliency question, the -- in 2008, when we started the company, we were very much focused on cloud in the very early days, and we said we were always going to make a 100% web tool, web- and a cloud-based tool. And we've heard tremendous number of positive things from our customers doing this as they all move to work from home. I think some of them had already been doing it, but everyone was able to achieve what they needed to in terms of activities that they were actually doing in our product.
In terms of seeing lead, it's too early to say. We really -- I can't say for sure, but we have seen some upticks in definitely inquiries when a lot of our competitors have software that's on-prem. So it's early days, but again, I really believe that this will help us in the long run.
Marty, you want to comment on the Matt's specific question about the 32 logo -- the 32 deals that went back into the pipeline? Did you do you see any theme there on why they went back, why they were postponed?
Well, I would say this. The end of March, everybody was in a state of shock, and everyone was trying to understand how it was going to affect their cash flow. There were 2 categories to those from my perspective. One was industries that saw an immediate drop in cash flow like airlines or even credit card companies, things like that, obviously, hospitality, those were put on hold indefinitely, and we have several of those occur.
The second category was, very prudent, CFOs saying, "Hey, let's just put the brakes on new deals, anything we're spending that's new for the next 2 or 3 months to see how this all shakes out." And most of the stuff that we saw slip was in that category where they're just being prudent in saying, "Let's see what's going to happen. Obviously, none of us have ever seen anything like this and how it affects the economy." That shock is sort of settling out now, and we're starting to see a lot of activity. So we're optimistic that things are going to slowly come back to normal in terms of our sales process.
That's helpful, Marty. And then my other question would just be on -- for your sales quota-carrying folks, are you making any changes to, I don't know, things like expanding the amount of quota they're required to carry, just maybe assuming some of the close rates won't be as high, and so kind of to get to the numbers we thought maybe at the initial plan that people need to carry more quota. Or any changes around that to kind of sales go-to-market?
No, not yet. This is 2 months old. We're 2 months we're into this. And so we are -- we're not going to do anything knee jerk. We're watching what's happening. We're happy with our pipeline right now. But again, no one's been through anything like this. So we just don't know how it's going to play out. But we don't have any plans to make any dramatic changes to our sales team or the size of their patches or our quotas.
Your next question is from the line of Terry Tillman with SunTrust Robinson.
I do appreciate also the extra color that you all added this quarter as it relates to the sales activity and pipeline. So that was helpful. I appreciate it. First question just related to -- you all had an announcement a couple of weeks ago as it relates to sales leadership change, Scott Ryan leaving or resigning. It looks like Julie is taking over more responsibilities. So what I was curious is if we could just learn a little bit more about the decision-making and what catalyze that. And I think in that press release, it talked about broader sales leadership changes and a focus on sales efficiency. So would just love some more color on what exactly happened and kind of the driver of it?
Sure. If you recall, when I got the CEO title here a little over 1.5 years ago, I was the acting Chief Operating Officer at the time. And that happened rather abruptly, and we knew that eventually we wanted a new COO. That's what we wanted. And so this is sort of the manifestation of going back to that traditional model of having a COO and not a Chief Revenue Officer. And a company our size clearly doesn't need both.
The second thing is we brought Scott in to really upgrade -- we were a transactional company, smaller deal size. And we really brought him in to bring us up that deal size ladder in terms of the talent, sales process and the skills of the sellers. And he did a good job of getting us substantial improvement there. He also brought in a lot of other managers and helped bring some of our other managers up the learning curve, and also brought in a leader for services when he was CRO. And then when Julie came in and sort of got her legs, we realized that it was -- we had one extra layer and really didn't need both titles.
At the same time, Scott had said that he had been in the sales leadership job a long time, want to take a short break and maybe look for another company where he could do the same type of thing he did for us. So we -- it was a joint agreement to have him move on, and we worked out a joint deal. And we're not replacing him, as we mentioned. A couple of other sales leaders also were -- left the company, and we feel we have a very lean and very good sales management team now. We really didn't need the excess layers. But Scott really brought us along to a good place, and it was a good time in terms of being efficient at the top of the org.
Okay. And I guess, Stuart, a follow-up question, just relates to the 111% revenue retention in the quarter.
For 2Q, kind of any perspective directionally on how to think about that? And even for the full year, again,
I know you're not giving guidance for the full year. But just how to think -- or what would be a base case for a revenue retention as you see it?
So as you indicate, we don't give guidance on that number. It's -- as you know, it's a buildup that includes add-on solutions and price increases, and it's net of solution churn. So we were pleased with the number that we posted in Q1, and we're pleased with the pipeline of new deals, both new logos and add-on sales. And as we indicated, we don't have visibility on when those deals are going to close.
As I indicated in my remarks, second quarter, we have such great visibility on revenue, as you know, because of the business model that we felt comfortable giving guidance on Q2. But until COVID duration and depth is greater visibility, we're not going to have visibility on closing new deals at the end of Q2 or Q3.
Your next question comes from the line of Stan Zlotsky with Morgan Stanley.
This is Sarah on for Stan. Kind of following up on your prior comments. In the past, you viewed growth as being balanced between new logos and add-on sales. And I was wondering to what extent is this still kind of your growth equation? Or in reaction to COVID, are you seeing it leaning towards one or the other?
I really don't see a change there. I think we're still going to see about 50-50 of add-on sales and new logos. And I think that a lot of the new logo activity or more of it will be in Europe, but I still see a lot of new logo activity in North America as well. So we really think it's going to remain about a 50-50 clip.
Got it. And then a quick follow-up. Are you seeing any customers asking to come back and essentially downsize their contracts or adjust payment terms in reaction to your business reacting to COVID?
Yes. We haven't seen too much of that, honestly. We're aware of the -- we certainly watch our renewal activity and track who's in what industry that might be affected. But so far, that hasn't been a big issue.
Our next question is from the line of Tom Roderick with Stifel.
Glad to hear you guys are both doing well, and the team is staying as healthy as it can be. So it's a great start with where we're at right now. I would love to chat a little bit more -- I apologize, I had a little trouble getting in the call. So you may have addressed it in the first few minutes, Marty. But relative to the European expansion plans, opportunity is still there. I'm guessing your efforts at hiring people and looking at potential M&A targets with your solid balance sheet, I'm guessing that's probably been pushed back a little bit. But perhaps you can go into a little bit more detail about how you're tactically able to proceed in an area where you didn't perhaps have as many boots on the ground as you wanted, you're looking to hire. How much does that sort of set you back from a timing standpoint? And what's the urgency of customers over there to move forward with digital transformations in light of January 15, 2021, mandate?
Well, yes, several aspects. First off, the -- yes, the M&A activity has definitely slowed. And as I've always said, we're going to be very careful doing acquisitions to make sure we get something that checks most of the boxes we're concerned about, but that has slowed. I would say that our ability to recruit people in EMEA has not changed that much. We're finding that we've been able to continue to recruit salespeople and the delivery people quite effectively there. We're a little bit behind, but it really wasn't a COVID thing. It's -- our EMEA team is very thorough when they hire, and they've got a very good track record of hiring good talent and having very low attrition. So I would say it's more about them being more careful and making sure we have the best people possible.
And then in terms of our growth strategy, we're continuing in EMEA. We haven't slowed that at all, and we're seeing good reception from the customers. It's quite amazing, and our pipeline is growing at the exact rate we anticipated. So we're pretty pleased with EMEA, and we're going to continue to expand there. It's really greenfield for us in many ways. It's really greenfield in terms of how late we went into EMEA.
Yes. Perfect. Got it. And then now that you've fully lapped the SBL impact in the model, and maybe more importantly, you've gotten -- your customers up on this sort of all-you-can-eat plan. How does that sort of roll through the way you think about churn? I mean customers now that they're sort of on this all- you-can-eat, that wouldn't seem like even if they have fewer employees, the number of seats they would utilize would go down. So I guess churn would be exposed to the usual suspects of bankruptcies and M&A and some of the things that Stuart talked about. But can you just sort of talk through churn as a concept going forward, and how that might differ from the past with your -- all your customers on SBL now?
Well, I -- going out of limb, I don't think SBL really affects churn. I think what's happened is we have given customers -- as we talked about before, the customers are always limited by the number of seats they had, and they would make careful decisions on when they'd expand. I think a lot of customers have expanded a number of seats. We've seen the number of users go substantially higher since we enacted SBL. So it makes it more sticky in general. I really haven't seen a decline of end users, and maybe that's something that will come as COVID goes through its life cycle here.
But remember, we do stuff that's regulatory in general and stuff that's downstream in the reporting process. And it's really mission-critical or it's required by the government. So our churn -- I'm glad we're talking about this a lot because that's probably the thing that is -- we're most proud of, is we have a very low churn rate, and that just induces incredible stability in our financial model. So I'm really not that concerned about churn from an SBL point of view, and I don't think companies that are going to stay in business are going to look at us any differently after COVID.
You have a question from the line of Mike Grondahl with Northland Capital.
This is Michael on for Mike. Maybe just one quick one on the FERC announcement yesterday. Can you give us a rough idea of just the number of logos in that space?
It's about 600, isn't it, Marty?
Yes. I think it's 660, roughly, somewhere in there, mostly good-sized companies. And so -- and like we said in the press release, a lot of them our customers already ready, and they've been bugging us about whether we were going to do this. What we're finding is customers see more and more XBRL coming. It's coming all over the world for all the regulatory agencies, slowly but surely. And these -- our customers want us standardize on one platform to do all their XBRLs. So a lot of our SEC customers was pestering us about this, and we really didn't want to commit to it until FERC put out their taxonomy, which happened a couple of months ago. And then we went through the due diligence of understanding how it would affect our product and our go-to-market. But we're really well positioned, as we said in the press release, to take a significant amount of that market.
And there are no other questions at this time.
Great. Well, thank you, everybody. We appreciate it.
Yes, I think we're done, Adam. Thank you.
Thank you again for joining today's conference call. You may now disconnect.
